Cleburne, Texas
Code of Ordinances
2025 S-92 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through
Ordinance 10-2025-35, passed 10-14-25
A copy of each ordinance is available in the City Secretary's Office, 10 N.
Robinson, Cleburne, Texas, 76031, in its original form.
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
CHARTER
Section
Article I. Incorporation and Territory
   
1.1   Corporate name
   
1.2   Creation and change of municipal district boundaries
   
1.3   Extension of boundaries
   
1.4   Effect of this charter on existing law
   
1.5   Amending the charter
   
1.6   Severability clause
   
1.7   Record of amendments
Article II. Corporate and General Powers
   
2.1   Powers of the city
   
2.2   Eminent domain
   
2.3   Street improvements and jurisdictional authority
   
2.4   Establishment and control of streets   
   
2.5   Railroads
   
2.6   Sanitary sewer system
   
2.7   Garbage disposal
   
2.8   Cemeteries
   
2.9   Housing authority
   
2.10   Tort liability
   
2.11   Provisions relating to assignment, execution and garnishment
   
2.12   City not required to give security or executive bond
Article III. Officers, Elections and City Council
   
3.1   Governing body
   
3.2   The Council
   
3.3   Manner of holding elections
   
3.4   Qualifications for office
   
3.5   How to get name on ballot
   
3.6   Election by majority
   
3.7   Vacancies
   
3.8   Compensation of members
   
3.9   Presiding officer - Mayor
   
3.10   Powers of Council
   
3.11   Council not to interfere in appointments or removals
   
3.12   Induction into office; meetings
   
3.13   Council to be judge of qualifications of its members
   
3.14   Rules of procedure; journal
   
3.15   Ordinances
   
3.16   Procedure for passage of ordinances
   
3.17   Investigations by Council
Article IV. City Administration
Division 1 - Departments
   
4.1   Administration departments
Division 2 - City Manager
   
4.2   Qualifications
   
4.3   Powers and duties
   
4.4   Absence of City Manager
   
4.5   Departmental divisions
   
4.6   Appointment, salary and removal of City Manager
   
4.7   Bond of City Manager
Division 3 - City Secretary
   
4.8    City Secretary
Division 4 - Municipal Court
   
4.9   Municipal Court
   
4.10   Municipal Court Judge
Division 5 - City Attorney
   
4.11   City Attorney
Division 6 - General Administration
   
4.12   Publicity of record
   
4.13   Personal interest
   
4.14   Oath of office
Article V. Initiative, Referendum and Recall
   
5.1   Power of initiative
   
5.2   Power of referendum
   
5.3   Form of petitions; committee of petitioners
   
5.4   Filing, examination and certification of petition
   
5.5   Amendment of petition
   
5.6   Effect of certification of referendum petition
   
5.7   Consideration by Council
   
5.8   Submission to electors
   
5.9   Form of ballot for initiated and referred ordinance
   
5.10   Results of election
   
5.11   Repealing ordinances; publication
   
5.12   Recall; general
   
5.13   Recall procedure
   
5.14   Recall petitions
   
5.15   Recall election
   
5.16   Ballots in recall election
   
5.17   Result of recall election
   
5.18   Limitations on recall
   
5.19   District judge may order election
Article VI. Budget
   
6.1   Fiscal year
   
6.2   Preparation and submission of budget
   
6.3   Budget a public record
   
6.4   Public hearing on budget
   
6.5   Vote required for adoption
   
6.6   Date of final adoption; failure to adopt
   
6.7   Effective date of budget; certificate; copies made available
   
6.8   Proposed expenditures; comparison with other years
   
6.9   Contingent appropriation
Article VII. Bonds
   
7.1   Refunding bonds
   
7.2   Power to borrow
   
7.3   Bond ordinance and election
Article VIII. Finance Department
   
8.1   Finance administration; duty and responsibility of City Manager
   
8.2   Transfer of appropriations
   
8.3   Accounting supervision and control
   
8.4   Appropriations lapse at end of year
   
8.5   Purchase procedure
   
8.6   Sale of city property; procedure
   
8.7   Contracts for city improvements
   
8.8   Accounting control of purchases
   
8.9   Disbursement of funds
   
8.10   Surety bonds
   
8.11   Liability of officers of the city
   
8.12   Independent annual audit
   
8.13   Financial statement
Article IX. Taxes and Taxation
   
9.1   Property subject to taxation
   
9.2   Tax levies
   
9.3   Liens
   
9.4   Contract for collection of delinquent taxes
Article X. Franchise and Public Utilities
   
10.1   Regulation of public utilities
   
10.2   Transfer of franchise
   
10.3   Franchises and special privileges
   
10.4   Regulation of rates
   
10.5   City utilities
   
10.6   Water and Sewer Department
   
10.7   The power to buy and sell gas, etc.
ARTICLE I. ADOPTION, INCORPORATION AND TERRITORY
Section 1.1 CORPORATE NAME.
   The inhabitants of the City of Cleburne, within the boundaries as now
established or as hereafter established in the manner provided by this Charter,
shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity,
under the name of the "City of Cleburne."
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 1.2 CREATION AND CHANGE OF MUNICIPAL DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The City Council shall have power by ordinance to divide the City of
Cleburne into municipal districts, and shall have power to alter or change the
municipal district boundaries of the City of Cleburne, which municipal
districts shall be comprised, as nearly as practicable, of contiguous territory
within straight lines, and as nearly as practicable shall contain the same
number of registered voters, and it shall require a three-fourths (3/4) vote of
all the Council persons elected to change, at any time, the number of municipal
districts, or the boundaries of the same, and no change shall be made in said
municipal districts or the boundaries of the same, unless it be done at least
more than six (6) months before the next general ensuing City election;
provided, however, when any additional territory shall become a part of the
City, the municipal district (s) which the same was adjoining shall be held for
all purposes to be extended so as to include said added territory; provided,
there shall at all times be at least (4) municipal districts within the City.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 1.3 EXTENSION OF BOUNDARIES.
   The City Council may by ordinance, resolution, or agreement with adjoining
cities fix the boundaries in any manner the City Council deems advisable. The
City Council may, without limitation, exchange territory with other cities,
towns, disannex territory and annex territory. Residents of annexed territory
shall be entitled to all rights and privileges of citizens who reside in the
City, and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions, and regulations
of the City.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 1.4 EFFECT OF THIS CHARTER ON EXISTING LAW.
   All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force under the
City government of Cleburne and not in conflict with the provisions of this
Charter shall remain in force under this Charter until altered, amended, or
repealed by the Council after this Charter takes effect; and all rights of the
City of Cleburne under existing franchises and contracts are preserved in full
force and effect to the City of Cleburne.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 1.5 AMENDING THE CHARTER.
   This Charter may be amended as provided by the general laws of the State of
Texas for Home Rule Cities.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 1.6 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.
   If any section or part of section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of
this Charter for the context in which such section may be inseparably connected
in meaning and effect with the section or part of section to which such holding
shall directly apply as specified by State or Federal law.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 1.7 RECORD OF AMENDMENTS.
   This Charter was originally adopted on March 28, 1950 and amended by
electorate on May 6, 1969; July 22, 1975; April 5, 1986 and on May 11, 2013.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
ARTICLE II. CORPORATE AND GENERAL POWERS
Section 2.1 POWERS OF THE CITY.
   (A)   General. The City shall have all the powers possible for a city to
have under the Constitution of this State as fully and completely as though
they were specifically enumerated in this Charter.
   (B)   Power of Ordinance. The City shall have power to enact and to enforce
all ordinances necessary to protect life, health and property; to prevent and
summarily abate and remove nuisances; to preserve and promote good government,
order, security, amusement, peace, prosperity, and the general welfare of said
City and its inhabitants; to exercise any and all municipal powers necessary to
the complete and efficient management and control of the municipal property and
affairs of said City; to exercise all powers that may be conducive to the
public welfare, happiness, and prosperity of said City and its inhabitants and
to enact and enforce any and all ordinances upon any subject, provided that no
such ordinances shall be enacted inconsistent with the provisions of this
Charter.
   (C)   Enumerated Powers. Except as clearly preempted by the Constitution of
this State, the legislature, or by this Charter, the City shall and may
exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of
every name and nature whatsoever; specifically, without limitation, the City
may:
      (1)   Acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any
City purposes in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate, by purchase,
gift, devise, lease, or condemnation, and may sell, lease, mortgage, hold,
manage and control such property as its interest may require;
      (2)   Use a corporate seal;
      (3)   Sue and be sued without waiving sovereign immunity;
      (4)   Contract and be contracted with;
      (5)   Implead and be impleaded in all courts and places and in all
matters whatever;
      (6)   May cooperate with the government of the State of Texas or any
agency thereof, the Federal Government or any agency thereof or any political
subdivision of the State of Texas, to accomplish any lawful purpose for the
advancement of the interest, welfare, health, morals, comfort, safety, and
convenience of the City or its inhabitants;
      (7)   License any lawful business, occupation or calling that is
susceptible to the control of the police power;
      (8)   License, regulate, control, or prohibit the erection of signs or
billboards within the corporate limits of the City;
      (9)   May provide for a public library and the maintenance thereof;
      (10)   Provide for the inspection of weights, measures, and meters and
fix a standard of such weights, measures, and meters, and to require conformity
to such standards and to provide penalties for failure to use or conform to the
same;
      (11)   Provide a building code; and to enforce proper regulations in
regard thereto, including but not limited to:
         (a)   Provide for the regulation and control of all building
contractors and to require efficiency in the same;
         (b)   Provide for inspection fees;
         (c)   Provide for the issuance of permits for erecting all buildings
and for the inspection of the construction of buildings;
      (12)   Regulate and control the operation of all character of vehicles
using public street;
      (13)   To zone land;
      (14)   To regulate the subdivision of land.
   (D)   Not Exhaustive or Exclusive. The enumeration of particular powers by
this Charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive or exhaustive, and in addition
to the powers enumerated therein or implied thereby, or appropriate to the
exercise of such powers, it is intended that the City of Cleburne shall have,
and may exercise, all powers of local self-government, and any other powers
which, under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, it would be
competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate, and also such further
powers as may hereafter be granted under the Constitution and laws of Texas.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 2.2 EMINENT DOMAIN.
   The City shall have the full right, power, and authority to exercise the
power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the
powers conferred upon it by this Charter or by the Constitution or laws of the
State of Texas. The City may exercise the power of eminent domain in any other
manner now or hereafter not clearly prohibited by the Constitution or laws of
this State, or in the manner and form that may be provided by ordinance of the
governing body of the City. The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall
include the right of the City to take the fee in the lands so condemned and
such power and authority shall include the right to condemn public property for
such purposes. The City shall have and possess this power of condemnation of
property within or without the corporate limits for any municipal or public
purpose, even though not specifically enumerated herein or in this Charter.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 2.3 STREET IMPROVEMENTS AND JURISDICTIONAL AUTHORITY.
   The City of Cleburne shall have exclusive and inalienable dominion, control,
and jurisdiction in, upon, and over, and under the public streets, avenues,
alleys, and highways of the City, and may provide for the improvement thereof
by paving, repaving, raising, draining, or otherwise. Such exclusive dominion,
control, and jurisdiction in, upon, over, and under the public streets,
avenues, alleys, and highways of the City shall also include, but not be
limited to, the right to regulate, locate, relocate, remove, or prohibit the
location of, all utility pipes, lines, wires, or other property.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 2.4 ESTABLISHMENT AND CONTROL OF STREETS.
   The City of Cleburne shall have the power to lay out, establish, open,
alter, widen, lower, extend, grade, abandon, discontinue, abolish, close, care
for, pave, supervise, maintain, and improve streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks,
squares, public places, and bridges; and regulate the use thereof and require
the removal from streets, sidewalks, alleys, and other public property or
places of all obstructions and encroachments of every nature or character upon
any of said streets and sidewalks.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 2.5 RAILROADS.
   The City shall have the power by ordinance or otherwise to direct and
control, within the city limits, the speed of engines, locomotives, and motor
cars operating on railroad tracks, the construction of railroad tracks,
turnouts, and switches, and the regulation of the grade thereof and the use of
streets, and regulating unusual and excessive noises, and to regulate by
ordinance all signal lights and safety devices at street crossings.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 2.6 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
   The City shall have the power to provide for a sanitary sewer system and to
require property owners to connect their premises with such sewer system; to
provide for fixing penalties for failure to make sanitary sewer connections;
and shall further have the right to fix charges and compensation to be charged
by the City for sewerage service, providing rules and regulations for the
collection thereof.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 2.7 GARBAGE DISPOSAL.
   The City of Cleburne shall have the right by ordinance to adopt and
prescribe rules and regulations for the handling and disposition of all
garbage, trash, and rubbish, and shall have the right to fix charges and
compensation to be charged by the City for such service, providing rules and
regulations for the collection thereof. Any contract or license permitting or
authorizing garbage or waste removal service within the City shall be subject
to the provisions of
Article IX of this Charter.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 2.8 CEMETERIES.
   The City shall have power to regulate burial grounds, cemeteries, and
crematories owned by any person, firm, corporation, or association now or
hereafter established, and condemn and close any such in the thickly settled
portions of the City when public interest or public health may demand, and
shall have power to regulate the burial of the dead; to purchase, establish,
and regulate one or more cemeteries; to regulate the registration of deaths and
births, and the filing thereof with the County Clerk of Johnson County, Texas;
and to direct the returning and keeping of bills of mortality.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 2.9 HOUSING AUTHORITY.
   The Council may create a housing authority of such number, terms, and
compensation of members as the Council may determine and may delegate to the
housing authority such powers relating to the planning, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance, or operation of housing
projects and housing accommodations as the Council may determine.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 2.10 TORT LIABILITY.
   Before the City of Cleburne shall be liable for damages for the death or
personal injuries of any person or for damages to or destruction of property of
any kind, the person, injured, if living, or his representatives, if deceased,
or the owner, his agent or attorney of the property damaged or destroyed shall
give the City Manager or City Secretary notice in writing of such death,
injury, damage or destruction, duly verified by affidavit, within one hundred
eighty (180) days after same has been sustained, within specifically in such
written notice when, where, and how the death, injury, damage, or destruction
occurred, and the apparent extent thereof, the amount of damages sustained, the
actual residence of the claimant by street and number at the date the claim is
presented, the actual residence of such claimant for six (6) months immediately
preceding the occurrence of such death, injury, damage or destruction and the
names and addresses of all witnesses upon whom is relied to establish the claim
for damages. No action at law for damages shall be brought against the City for
such death, injury, damage or destruction sixty (60) days after the notice
hereinbefore described has been filed with the City Manager or the City
Secretary.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 2.11 PROVISIONS RELATING TO ASSIGNMENT, EXECUTION AND GARNISHMENT.
   The property, real and personal, belonging to the City shall not be liable
to be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution or cost bill. The funds
belonging to the City, in the hands of any person, firm, or corporation shall
not be liable to garnishment, attachment, or sequestration; nor shall the City
be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property
it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the City nor any of its
officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment on
any account whatever. The City shall not be obligated to recognize any
assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents, or contractors.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 2.12 CITY NOT REQUIRED TO GIVE SECURITY OR EXECUTE BOND.
   It shall not be necessary in any action, suit, or proceeding in which the
City of Cleburne is a party, for any bond, undertaking, or security to be
demanded or executed by or on behalf of the City in any of the State courts,
but in all such actions, suits, appeals, or proceeding same shall be conducted
in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking, or security had been given as
required by law, and the City shall be just as liable as if security of bond
had been duly executed.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
ARTICLE III. OFFICERS, ELECTIONS AND CITY COUNCIL
Section 3.1 GOVERNING BODY.
   The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the
"Council-Manager Government." pursuant to its provisions and subject only to
the limitations imposed by the State Constitution and by this Charter, all
power of the City shall be vested in an elective council, hereafter referred to
as "the Council," composed of the Mayor and Council members, which shall enact
local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and employ the City
Manager, who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the City.
All powers of the City shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this
Charter, or if the manner be not prescribed then in such manner as may be
prescribed by ordinance.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 3.2 THE COUNCIL.
   (A)   The Council persons and Mayor shall hold office two (2) years,
respectively and until their successors are elected and have been qualified.
   (B)   All general elections for mayor and City Council members shall be held
on such date as is prescribed by State law, this City Charter, or by resolution
or ordinance of the City Council. Two (2) Council persons and a mayor shall be
elected for a two (2) year term each even-numbered year. Two (2) Council
persons shall be elected for a two (2) year term each odd-numbered year.
   (C)   The City shall be divided into districts in accordance with
Section 1.2 of this Charter, with one Council member elected from each
respective district, and the Mayor elected at large.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 3.3 MANNER OF HOLDING ELECTIONS.
   The manner of holding and the voting at all elections to be held in this
City, and the power and duties of the managers thereof, the counting of votes,
the making of the returns of said election, shall be, according to State law,
in force at the time of any election, as far as the same shall be applicable
and not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter; provided, that the
City Council shall have full power and authority to pass such ordinances as it
shall deem expedient for conducting elections. In the event there should be any
failure of State law or this Charter to provide for some feature of the City
elections, then the City Council shall have the power to provide for such
deficiency. No informalities in conducting a City election shall invalidate an
election, if it be conducted fairly and in substantial compliance with the
State laws, where applicable and the Charter and ordinances of the City.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 3.4 QUALIFICATIONS FOR OFFICE.
   No person shall be eligible to any elective office in said City unless that
person possesses the qualifications of an elector, as herein provided, and is a
citizen of the United States and shall have been a resident of the City for at
least twelve (12) months prior to the City election day and shall not be in
arrears in the payment of any taxes or other liability due the City or from
said City.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 3.5 HOW TO GET NAME ON BALLOT.
   The City Secretary shall maintain a packet with information for persons
interested in becoming a candidate.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 3.6 ELECTION BY MAJORITY.
   The Mayor and Council shall be elected by majority vote. Should any
candidate fail to receive a majority of votes at the regular election for the
office for which he is a candidate, the Council shall immediately order a
runoff election to be held in accordance with State law.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 3.7 VACANCIES.
   A vacancy in the Council shall be filled by a majority vote of the remaining
members of the Council, by the selection of a person possessing all the
qualifications prescribed by
Section 3.4 of this Article. Where more than one vacancy shall develop at any
one time, then a special election shall be called in accordance with State law.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 3.8 COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.
   Members of the City Council and the Mayor shall serve without pay and shall
receive no remuneration for any service rendered the City.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 3.9 PRESIDING OFFICER - MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Council and shall be recognized
as head of the City government for all ceremonial purposes and by the Governor
of the State of Texas for purposes of military law, but shall have no regular
administrative duties. The Mayor shall be entitled to vote upon all matters
considered by the Council, but he shall have no veto power. The Council shall
elect a Mayor pro tem from their members who shall act as Mayor during the
absence or disability of the Mayor and, if a vacancy should occur, shall become
Mayor until the next regular election.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 3.10 POWERS OF COUNCIL.
   All powers of the City and the determination of all matters of policy shall
be vested in the City Council. Among the other powers that may be exercised by
the Council, the following are hereby enumerated for greater certainty:
   (A)   Appoint and remove the City Manager, in accordance with
Article IV, Division 2 of this Charter;
   (B)   Adopt the budget of the City;
   (C)   Authorize the issuance of bonds by a bond ordinance in accordance with
State law;
   (D)   Inquire into the conduct of any office appointed by the Council and
make investigations as to municipal affairs;
   (E)   Provide for all boards required by law and other boards and
commissions it deems necessary;
   (F)   Adopt plats and zone property;
   (G)   Adopt and modify the official map of the City;
   (H)   Adopt, modify, and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission
for the clearance of slum districts and rehabilitation of blighted areas;
   (I)   Adopt, modify, and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission
for the re-planning, improvement, and redevelopment of neighborhoods and for
the re-planning, reconstruction, or redevelopment of any area or district which
may have been destroyed in whole or in part by disaster;
   (J)   Regulate, license, and fix the charges or fares made by any person
owning, operating, or controlling any vehicle of any character used for the
carrying of passengers for hire or the transportation of freight for hire on
the public streets and alleys of the City;
   (K)   Provide for the establishment and designation of fire limits and to
prescribe the kind and character of buildings or structures or improvements to
be erected therein, and to provide for the erection of fireproof buildings
within certain limits, and to provide for the condemnation of dangerous
structures or buildings or dilapidated buildings or buildings calculated to
increase the fire hazard, and the manner of their removal or destruction.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 3.11 COUNCIL NOT TO INTERFERE IN APPOINTMENTS OR REMOVALS.
   Neither the Council nor any of its members shall direct the appointment of
any person to or his removal from office by the City Manager or by any of his
subordinates. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members
shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager and
neither the Council nor any members thereof shall direct or give orders to any
subordinates of the City Manager, either publicly or privately.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 3.12 INDUCTION INTO OFFICE; MEETINGS.
   Following each regular municipal election held under this Charter, or any
special election for the purpose of filling vacancies in the Council, the
Council shall meet at the usual time and place for holding meetings, and the
newly elected members shall qualify and assume the duties of office.
Thereafter, the Council shall meet regularly at such times as may be prescribed
by its rules but not less frequently than once each month. Special meetings
shall be called by the City Secretary upon request of the Mayor, City Manager
or two (2) members of the City Council. All meetings of the City Council shall
be open to the public except where otherwise authorized by law and shall comply
with the open meetings law of the State of Texas.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 3.13 COUNCIL TO BE JUDGE OF QUALIFICATIONS OF ITS MEMBERS.
   The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its
members and for such purposes shall have power to subpoena witnesses and
require the production of records, but the decision of the Council in any such
case shall be subject to review by the Courts.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 3.14 RULES OF PROCEDURE; JOURNAL.
   The Council shall determine its own rules and order of business. It shall
keep an indexed journal of its proceedings and the journal shall be open to the
public inspection.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 3.15 ORDINANCES.
   In addition to such acts of the Council as are required by statute or by
this Charter to be by ordinance, every act of the Council establishing a fine
or other penalty or providing for the expenditure of funds or for the
contracting of indebtedness shall be by ordinance. The enacting clause of all
ordinances shall be "BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
CLEBURNE."
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 3.16 PROCEDURE FOR PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES.
   Every ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form and, upon
passage, shall take effect at the time indicated therein; provided that any
ordinance imposing a penalty, fine or forfeiture for a violation of its
provisions shall become effective upon publication, subject to the provisions
of
Article V of this Charter. The City Clerk shall give notice of the passage of
every ordinance imposing a penalty, fine or forfeiture for a violation of the
provisions thereof, by causing the caption or title, including the penalty, of
any such ordinance to be published in the official newspaper of the City of
Cleburne or other media as authorized by State law at least once within ten
days after the passage of said ordinance. He shall note on every ordinance, the
caption of which is hereby required to be published, and on the record thereof,
the fact that same has been published as required by the Charter, and the date
of such publication, which shall be prima facie evidence of the legal
publication and promulgation of such ordinance, provided that the provisions of
this section shall not apply to the correction, amendment, revision, and
codification of the ordinances of the City for publication in book or pamphlet
form. Except as otherwise provided by
Section 10.3, and
Article V of this Charter, it shall not be necessary to the validity of any
ordinance that it shall be read more than one time or considered at more than
one session of the City Council. Every ordinance shall be authenticated by the
signature of the Mayor and City Secretary and shall be systematically recorded
and indexed in an ordinance book in a manner approved by the Council. It shall
only be necessary to record the caption or title of ordinances in the minutes
or journal of Council meetings. The City Council shall have power to cause the
ordinances of the City to be corrected, amended, revised, codified and printed
in code form as often as the Council deems advisable, and such printed code,
when adopted by the Council, shall be in full force and effect without the
necessity of publishing the same or any part thereof in a newspaper. Such
printed Code shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and places without
further proof.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 3.17 INVESTIGATIONS BY COUNCIL.
   By a majority vote of a quorum of the Council, the Council shall have power
to inquire into the conduct of any officer, department, agency, or office of
the City and to make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that
purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production of
books, papers, and other evidence. Failure to obey such subpoena or to produce
books, papers, or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this
section shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
ARTICLE IV. CITY ADMINISTRATION
DIVISION 1 - DEPARTMENTS
Section 4.1 ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS.
   There are hereby created the following administrative departments: Finance,
Police, Fire, Public Works and such other departments as may be established by
the City Manager.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
DIVISION 2 - CITY MANAGER
Section 4.2 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The City Manager shall be chosen by the Council solely on the basis of his
executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to the
Manager's actual experience in, or knowledge of, accepted practice in respect
to the duties of the office as hereinafter set forth. At the time of the
Manager's appointment, the City Manager need not be a resident of the City or
State, but during the Manager's tenure of office the City Manager shall reside
within the City. A Mayor or City Council member shall not be qualified to serve
as City Manager until the expiration of two (2) years after serving on the
Council.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 4.3 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The City Manager shall be the chief executive officer and the head of the
administrative branch of the City government. The City Manager shall be
responsible to the Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the
City and to that end the City Manager shall have power and shall be required
to:
   (A)   Appoint and remove all officers and employees of the City including
the department heads, except as the City Manager may authorize the head of a
department to appoint and remove subordinates in such department;
   (B)   Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the Council and be
responsible for its administration after adoption;
   (C)   Prepare and submit to the Council as of the end of the fiscal year a
complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City for
the preceding year;
   (D)   Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs
of the City and make such recommendations as may seem to him desirable;
   (E)   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or
required of him by the Council, not inconsistent with this Charter;
   (F)   Two or more departments may be headed by the same individual, the
Manager may head one or more departments, and heads of departments may also
serve as chiefs of divisions.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 4.4 ABSENCE OF CITY MANAGER.
   To perform the City Manager's duties during his temporary absence or
disability, the Manager may designate by letter filed with the City Secretary a
qualified administrative officer of the City. In the event of failure of the
Manager to make such designation, the Council may by resolution appoint an
officer of the City to perform the duties of the Manager until he shall return
or his disability shall cease.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 4.5 DEPARTMENTAL DIVISIONS.
   The work of each administrative department may be distributed among such
divisions thereof as may be established by the City Manager.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 4.6 APPOINTMENT, SALARY AND REMOVAL OF CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   Appointment. The Council shall appoint, by a majority vote of the
entire Council, an officer of the City who shall have the title of City Manager
and who shall have the powers and perform the duties provided in this Charter.
The Manager shall not be appointed for a fixed time.
   (B)   Salary. The salary of the City Manager shall be fixed by the City
Council, of which all or a portion of the salary may be paid out of the
revenues of the Water and Sewer Department.
   (C)   Removal. The Manager may be removed at the will and pleasure of the
Council by a vote of 4/5 of the entire Council. The action of the Council in
suspending or removing the City Manager shall be final, it being the intention
of this Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for such
suspension or removal in the City Council.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 4.7 BOND OF CITY MANAGER.
   The City Council shall require the City Manager, before entering upon the
duties of his office, to execute a good and sufficient surety company bond in
such amount as the Council may demand, payable to the City of Cleburne, and
conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his office, the
premium of such bond to be paid by the City.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
DIVISION 3 - CITY SECRETARY
Section 4.8 CITY SECRETARY.
   The Council shall designate an officer of the City who shall be recommended
by the City Manager to serve as City Secretary. The City Secretary shall give
notice of meetings of the Council, shall keep the journal of its proceedings,
shall authenticate by the Secretary's signature, and record in full in a book
kept and indexed for the resolutions, and shall perform such other duties as
the City Manager shall assign to the Secretary and those elsewhere provided for
in the Charter.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
DIVISION 4 - MUNICIPAL COURT
Section 4.9 MUNICIPAL COURT.
   There is hereby created a Municipal Court for the City of Cleburne which
shall possess jurisdiction authorized by laws of the State of Texas relative to
Municipal Courts. There shall be a clerk for the Municipal Court who shall be
appointed to this position as provided by law.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 4.10 MUNICIPAL COURT JUDGE.
   (A)   There shall be one or more magistrates of the Municipal Court known as
the Municipal Court Judge, who shall be a competent and licensed attorney
practicing law in the State of Texas, and shall be appointed by the City
Council to serve for a term of two (2) years, or until his successor in office
shall have been appointed and qualified. The judge may be removed by the City
Council at any time for incompetency, misconduct, malfeasance, or disability,
after notice and an opportunity to be heard before the Council. A judge shall
receive such salary as fixed in the budget by the Council. In the event of
removal of a Municipal Court Judge by action of the City Council, the City
Council may appoint a duly qualified attorney practicing law in the State of
Texas, and otherwise qualified under the laws of the State of Texas, to fill
the vacancy caused by such removal.
   (B)   The judge shall have power to punish for contempt to the same extent
and under the same circumstances as the State court with concurrent
jurisdiction and may punish for contempt in all criminal cases. In the event
the judge of the Municipal Court should, for any reason, be disqualified, or
deemed himself to be disqualified, to sit as judge in any cause pending before
the court, then the judge shall notify the Mayor in writing of the
disqualification. The Mayor shall appoint a duly licensed attorney to sit as
special judge in such cause. The special judge shall take any oath as may be
required by law and shall perform all duties of the Municipal Judge with regard
to that matter. The term of the Municipal Judge shall run concurrently with
that of the Mayor, and any appointment to fill the position of Municipal Judge
when a vacancy occurs shall only be for the remainder of that unexpired term. A
special judge shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the City
Council.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
DIVISION 5 - CITY ATTORNEY
Section 4.11 CITY ATTORNEY.
   (A)   The City Council shall appoint a competent and duly licensed attorney
licensed to practice law in the State of Texas for at least five (5) years who
shall be its City Attorney. The City Attorney shall receive such compensation
as may be fixed by the Council and shall hold office at the will of the City
Council and until a successor is appointed.
   (B)   The City Attorney may represent the City in all litigation and shall
be the legal advisor of and attorney and counsel for the City and all officers
and departments thereof in matters relating to their official powers and
duties. It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to perform all services
incident to his position as may be required by statute, by this Charter, or by
ordinance.
   (C)   The City Attorney shall have power to appoint an assistant if deemed
necessary by him, subject to the approval of the City Council, at such
compensation as may be fixed by the Council; and more than one assistant if
deemed necessary by the Council, such assistant or assistants to hold office at
the will of the City Attorney, so long as he remains City Attorney.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
DIVISION 6 - GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
Section 4.12 PUBLICITY OF RECORD.
   All records and accounts of every office, department or every office,
department, or agency of the City shall be open to inspection, in accordance
with the Public Information Act, under reasonable regulations established by
the City Manager, in accordance with State law.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 4.13 PERSONAL INTEREST.
   No member of the Council or any officer or employee of the City shall have a
financial interest in any contract or sale to the City of any land, services,
or property except in full compliance with State law.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 4.14 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Every officer, including elected officers, the City Manager, City Secretary,
Municipal Judge, City Attorney, members of the Planning and Zoning Commission
and Board of Adjustment of the City shall, before entering upon the duties of
his office, take and subscribe to the oath or affirmation required by the
Constitution of the State of Texas.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
ARTICLE V. INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
Section 5.1 POWER OF INITIATIVE.
   The electors (which in this Article shall mean the registered voters
residing in the City of Cleburne) shall have power to propose any ordinance
except an ordinance appropriating money or authorizing the levy of taxes, and
to adopt or reject the same at the polls, such power being known as the
initiative. Any initiative ordinance may be submitted to the Council by a
petition signed by qualified electors of the City equal in number to at least
twenty-five per centum of the number of votes cast at the last regular
municipal election.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 5.2 POWER OF REFERENDUM.
   The electors shall have power to approve or reject at the polls any
ordinance passed by the Council, or submitted by the Council to a vote of the
electors, such power being known as the referendum. Ordinances submitted to the
Council by initiative petition and passed by the Council without change shall
be subject to the referendum in the same manner as other ordinances. Within
twenty days after the enactment by the Council of any ordinance which is
subject to a referendum, a petition signed by qualified electors of the City
equal in number to at least twenty-five per centum of the number of votes cast
at the last preceding regular municipal election may be filed with the City
Secretary requesting that any such ordinance be either repealed or submitted to
a vote of the electors.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 5.3 FORM OF PETITIONS; COMMITTEE OF PETITIONERS.
   Initiative petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed
ordinance. The signatures to initiative or referendum petitions need not all be
appended to one paper, but to each separate petition there shall be attached a
statement of the circulator thereof as provided by this section. Each signer of
any petition paper shall sign his name in ink or indelible pencil and shall
indicate after his name his place of residence by street and number, or other
description sufficient to identify the place. There shall appear on each
petition the names and addresses of five electors, who, as a committee of the
petitioners, shall be regarded as responsible for the circulation and filing of
the petition. Attached to each separate petition paper there shall be an
affidavit of the circulator thereof that he, and he only, personally circulated
the foregoing paper, that it bears a stated number of signatures, that all
signatures appended thereto were made in his presence, and that he believes
them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to
be.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 5.4 FILING, EXAMINATION AND CERTIFICATION OF PETITION.
   All petition papers comprising an initiative or referendum petition shall be
assembled and filed with the City Secretary as one instrument. Within twenty
days after a petition is filed, the City Secretary shall determine whether each
paper of the petition has a proper statement of the circulator and whether the
petition is signed by a sufficient number of qualified electors. The City
Secretary shall declare any petition paper entirely invalid which does not have
attached thereto an affidavit signed by the circulator thereof. If a petition
paper is found to be signed by more persons than the number of signatures
certified by the circulator, the last signatures in excess of the number
certified shall be disregarded. If a petition paper is found to be signed by
fewer persons than the number certified, the signatures shall be accepted
unless void on other grounds. After completing the examination of the petition,
the City Secretary shall certify the result thereof to the Council at its next
regular meeting. If the City Secretary certifies that the petition is
insufficient they shall set forth in their certificate the particulars in which
it is defective and shall at once notify the committee of the petitioners of
the findings.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 5.5 AMENDMENT OF PETITION.
   An initiative or referendum petition may be amended at any time within ten
days after the notification of insufficiency has been sent by the City
Secretary, by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers signed and
filed as provided in case of an original petition. The City Secretary shall,
within five days after such an amendment is filed, make examination of the
amended petition and, if the petition is still insufficient, shall file a
certificate to that effect in their office and notify the committee of the
petitioners of the findings and no further action shall be had on such
insufficient petition. The finding of the insufficiency of a petition shall not
prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 5.6 EFFECT OF CERTIFICATION OF REFERENDUM PETITION.
   When a referendum petition, or amended petition as defined in Section 5.3 of
this Charter, has been certified as sufficient by the City Secretary, the
ordinance specified in the petition shall not go into effect, or further action
thereunder shall be suspended if it shall have gone into effect until and
unless approved by the electors, as hereinafter provided.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 5.7 CONSIDERATION BY COUNCIL.
   Whenever Council receives a certified initiative or referendum petition from
the City Secretary, it shall proceed at once to consider such petition. A
proposed initiative ordinance shall be read and provision shall be made for a
public hearing upon the proposed ordinance. The Council shall take final action
on the ordinance not later than sixty days after the date on which such
Ordinance was submitted to the Council by the City Secretary. A referred
ordinance shall be reconsidered by the Council and its final vote upon such
reconsideration shall be upon the question, "Shall the ordinance specified in
the referendum petition be repealed?"
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 5.8 SUBMISSION TO ELECTORS.
   If the Council shall fail to pass an ordinance proposed by initiative
petition, or shall pass it in a form different from that set forth in the
petition therefore, or if the Council fails to repeal a referred ordinance, the
proposed or referred ordinance shall be submitted to the electors on the first
uniform election date that allows for compliance with law after the date that
the Council takes its final vote thereon. The Council may, in its discretion,
and if no regular election is to be held within such period shall, provide for
a special election.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 5.9 FORM OF BALLOT FOR INITIATED AND REFERRED ORDINANCES.
   Ordinances submitted to vote of the electors in accordance with the
initiative and referendum provisions of this Charter shall be submitted by
ballot title, which shall be prepared in all cases by the City Attorney. The
ballot title may be different from the legal title of any such initiated or
referred ordinance and shall be a clear, concise statement, without argument or
prejudice, descriptive of the substance of such ordinance, if a paper ballot,
shall have below the ballot title the following propositions, one above the
other, in the order indicated. "FOR THE ORDINANCE" and "AGAINST THE ORDINANCE."
Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election and may be
submitted on the same ballot, but any paper ballot used for voting thereon
shall be for that purpose only. If voting machines are used, the ballot title
of any ordinance shall have below it the same two propositions, one above the
other or one preceding the other in the order indicated, and the elector shall
be given an opportunity to vote for either of the two propositions and thereby
to vote for or against the ordinance.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 5.10 RESULTS OF ELECTION.
   If a majority of the electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance
shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon be an ordinance of the City. A
referred ordinance which is not approved by a majority of the electors voting
thereon shall thereupon be deemed repealed. If conflicting ordinances are
approved by the electors at the same election, the one receiving the greatest
number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 5.11 REPEALING ORDINANCES; PUBLICATION.
   Initiative and referendum ordinances adopted or approved by the electors
shall be published, and may be amended or repealed by the Council, as in the
case of other ordinances.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 5.12 RECALL; GENERAL.
   The Mayor or any member of the City Council may be removed from office by
recall.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 5.13 RECALL PROCEDURE.
   Any elector of the City of Cleburne may make and file with the City
Secretary an affidavit containing the name or names of any member of the
Council or the Mayor whose removal is sought and a statement of the grounds for
removal. The Secretary shall thereupon deliver to the elector making such
affidavit copies of petition blanks demanding such removal. The City Secretary
shall keep a sufficient number of such printed petition blanks on hand for
distribution. Such blanks when issued by the City Secretary shall bear the
signature of that officer and be addressed to the City Council, and shall be
numbered, dated, and indicate the name of the person to whom issued. The
petition blanks when issued shall also indicate the number of such blanks
issued and the name of the officer whose removal is sought. The City Secretary
shall enter in a record to be kept in their office the name of the elector to
whom the petition blanks were issued and the number issued to said person.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 5.14 RECALL PETITIONS.
   The recall petition to be effective must be returned and filed with the City
Secretary within thirty days after the filing of the affidavit required in
Section 5.13 and it must be signed by qualified electors of the City equal in
number to at least fifty-one (51) per cent of the total number of votes cast at
the last general municipal election at which the Mayor and two Councilmen were
elected; provided, however, that the petition shall contain the signatures of
at least two hundred and fifty (250) qualified electors of the City and shall
conform to the provisions of
Section 5.3 herein. No petition papers shall be accepted as part of a petition
unless it bears the signature of the City Secretary as required in
Section 5.13 herein.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 5.15 RECALL ELECTION.
   The City Secretary shall at once examine the recall petition and if they
find it sufficient and in compliance with the provisions of this Article of the
Charter, shall within five (5) days submit it to the City Council with their
certificate to that effect and notify the officer sought to be recalled of such
action. If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign within five (5)
days after such notice the City Council shall thereupon order and fix a date
for holding a recall election. Any such election shall be held on the first
uniform election date that allows for compliance with law occurring after the
petition has been presented to the Council.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 5.16 BALLOTS IN RECALL ELECTION.
   Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following
requirements:
   (A)   With respect to each person whose removal is sought the question shall
be submitted "Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of (name of
office) by recall?
   (B)   Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the two
following propositions, one above the other, in the order indicated:
      "For the recall of (name of person)"
      "Against the recall of (name of person)"
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 5.17 RESULT OF RECALL ELECTION.
   If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against the
recall of the officer named on the ballot, he shall continue in office for the
remainder of his unexpired term, subject to recall as before. If a majority of
the votes cast at such an election be for the recall of the officer named on
the ballot, he shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall
petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy shall be filled by the
City Council as in other vacancies.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 5.18 LIMITATIONS ON RECALL.
   No recall petition shall be filed against the Mayor or a Councilman neither
within six months after he takes office nor in respect to an officer subjected
to a recall election and not removed thereby, until at least six months after
such election.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 5.19 DISTRICT JUDGE MAY ORDER ELECTION.
   Should the City Council fail or refuse to order any of the elections as
provided for in this Article, when all the requirements for such election have
been complied with by the petitioning electors in conformity with this Article
of the Charter, then it shall be the duty of the District Judge of Johnson
County, Texas, upon proper application being made therefore, to order such
elections and to enforce the carrying into effect of the provisions of this
Article of the Charter.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
ARTICLE VI. THE BUDGET
Section 6.1 FISCAL YEAR.
   The City Council shall have the power to establish the fiscal year of the
City government. The fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and
accounting year. As used in this Charter the term "budget year" shall mean the
fiscal year for which any particular budget is adopted and in which it is
administered.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 6.2 PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION OF BUDGET.
   The City Manager, at least sixty days prior to the beginning of each budget
year, or no later than 15 days after the tax role is submitted to the City,
shall submit to the Council a proposed budget and an explanatory budget
message. For such purpose, at such dates as he shall determine, the City
Manager, or an officer designated by the City Manager, shall obtain from the
head of each office, department, or agency estimates of revenue and expenditure
of that office, department, or agency detailed by organization units and
character and object of expenditure, and such other supporting data as he may
request. In preparing the budget, the City Manager shall review the estimates,
shall hold hearings thereon, and may revise the estimates, as he may deem
advisable.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 6.3 BUDGET A PUBLIC RECORD.
   The budget and budget message and all supporting schedules shall be a public
record in the office of the City Secretary open to public inspection by anyone.
The City Manager shall provide for distribution to interested persons.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 6.4 PUBLIC HEARING ON BUDGET.
   At the time and place so advertised, or at any time and place to which such
public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the Council shall hold a
public hearing on the budget as submitted, at which all interested persons
shall be given an opportunity to be heard for or against the estimates of any
budget item thereof.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 6.5 VOTE REQUIRED FOR ADOPTION.
   The budget shall be adopted by the favorable votes of at least a majority of
all members of the whole Council.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 6.6 DATE OF FINAL ADOPTION; FAILURE TO ADOPT.
   The budget shall be finally adopted not later than the end of the last month
of the current fiscal year. Should the Council take no final action on or prior
to such day, the budget, as submitted by the City Manager, shall be deemed to
have been finally adopted by the Council.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 6.7 EFFECTIVE DATE OF BUDGET; CERTIFICATE; COPIES MADE AVAILABLE.
   The final budget shall be made available for the use of all offices,
departments, and agencies, and for the use of interested persons and civic
organizations.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 6.8 PROPOSED EXPENDITURES; COMPARISON WITH OTHER YEARS.
   The proposed expenditures for the administration, operation, maintenance,
and capital outlay of each office, department or agency of the City shall be
itemized by character and object, In parallel columns opposite the various
items of expenditures, there shall be placed the actual amount of such items of
expenditure for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the
current fiscal year and the proposed amount for the ensuing budget year.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 6.9 CONTINGENT APPROPRIATION.
   Provision shall be made in the annual budget and in the appropriation
ordinance for a contingency fund, to be used in the case of unforeseen items of
expenditures. Such contingent appropriation shall be under the control of the
City Manager and distributed by him after approval by the City Council.
Expenditures from this appropriation shall be made only in case of established
emergencies and a detailed account of such expenditures shall be recorded and
reported. The proceeds of the contingent appropriation shall be disbursed only
by transfer to other departmental appropriations, the spending of which shall
be charged to the departments or activities for which the appropriations are
made.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
ARTICLE VII. BONDS
Section 7.1 REFUNDING BONDS.
   The City Council shall have the power and authority by ordinance duly passed
and is hereby expressly authorized to issue bonds for the purpose of refunding
bonds or other indebtedness of the City of Cleburne previously issued, in
accordance with the Constitution and the laws of the State of Texas.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 7.2 POWER TO BORROW.
   The City of Cleburne shall have the right and power to borrow money on the
credit of the City for permanent public improvements or for any other public
purpose consistent with the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas. The
City shall also have the power to borrow money against the revenues of any
municipally-owned utility and to mortgage the physical properties of such
utilities in payment of such debt consistent with the Constitution and the laws
of the State of Texas. In no event, however, shall revenue bonds be considered
an indebtedness of the City of Cleburne nor repaid with funds secured by
taxation.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 7.3 BOND ORDINANCE AND ELECTION.
   The City shall authorize the issuance of bonds by a Bond Ordinance passed by
an affirmative vote of a majority of all members of the City Council, and
approved by a majority of the qualified voters voting at an election called for
the purpose of authorizing the issuance of such bonds, if required by State
law.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
ARTICLE VIII. FINANCE DEPARTMENT
Section 8.1 FINANCE ADMINISTRATION; DUTY AND RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY MANAGER.
   The City Manager, or designee (which in this article shall mean a qualified
employee of the City), shall have charge of the administration of the financial
affairs of the City and to that end Manager, or designee, shall have authority
and shall be required to:
   (A)   Compile the estimates of revenues and expenditures for the budget;
   (B)   Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys and
have control over all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are not
exceeded;
   (C)   Maintain a general accounting system for the City government and each
of its offices, departments, and agencies; keep books for and exercise
financial budgetary control over each office, department, and agency; keep
accurate accounts for the items of appropriation contained in the City budget,
each of which accounts shall show the amount of the appropriation, the amounts
paid therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it and the unencumbered balance;
require reports of receipts and disbursements from each receiving and spending
agency of the City government to be made daily or at such intervals as he may
deem expedient;
   (D)   Submit to the Council a monthly statement of all receipts and
disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the
City;
   (E)   Prepare, as of the end of each fiscal year, a complete financial
statement and report;
   (F)   Serve as ex-officio City Treasurer and shall oversee the custody of
all public funds belonging to or under the control of the City, or any office,
department, or agency of the City government, and deposit all funds coming into
his hands in such depositories as may be designated by resolution of the
Council, subject to the requirements of law as to surety and the payment of
interest on deposits, but all such interest shall be the property of the City
and shall be accounted for and credited to the proper account;
   (G)   Oversee the custody of all investments and invested funds of the City
government, or in possession of such government in a fiduciary capacity, and
have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the City and the receipt and
delivery of City bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange;
   (H)   Supervise and appoint persons to be responsible for the purchase,
storage, and distribution of all supplies, materials, equipment, and other
articles used by any office, department, or agency of the City government.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 8.2 TRANSFER OF APPROPRIATIONS.
   The City Manager may at any time with the approval of the Council transfer
any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof between general
classifications of expenditures within an office, department, or agency. At the
request of the City Manager, the Council may, by resolution, transfer any
unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one office,
department, or agency to another.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 8.3 ACCOUNTING SUPERVISION AND CONTROL.
   The City Manager, or designee, shall have power and shall be required to:
   (A)   Prescribe the forms of receipts, vouchers, bills, or claims to be used
by all the offices, departments, and agencies of the City government;
   (B)   Examine and approve all contracts, orders, and other documents by
which the City government incurs financial obligations, having previously
ascertained that moneys have been appropriated and allotted and will be
available when the obligations shall become due and payable;
   (C)   Appoint a designee to audit and approve before payment all bills,
invoices, payrolls, and other evidences of claims, demands, or charges against
the City government and with the advice of the City Attorney determine the
regularity, legality, and correctness of such claims, demands, or charges;
   (D)   Inspect and audit any accounts or records of financial transactions
which may be maintained in any office, department or agency of the City
government apart from or subsidiary to the accounts kept in the Manager's
office.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 8.4 APPROPRIATIONS LAPSE AT END OF YEAR.
   All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the budget year to the extent
that they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 8.5 PURCHASE PROCEDURE.
   All purchases shall be made in accordance with State law.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 8.6 SALE OF CITY PROPERTY; PROCEDURE.
   All sales of City property shall be made in accordance with State law.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 8.7 CONTRACTS FOR CITY IMPROVEMENTS.
   Any City improvement costing more than the amount requiring competitive
bidding as specified by State law shall be executed by contract except where
such improvement is authorized by the Council to be executed directly by a City
department in conformity with detailed plans, specifications, and estimates.
All such contracts for more than the amount specified by State law shall be
awarded in accordance with State law.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 8.8 ACCOUNTING CONTROL OF PURCHASES.
   All purchases made and contracts executed by the City Manager, or designee,
shall be pursuant to a written requisition from the head of the office,
department, or agency whose appropriation will be charged, and no contract or
order shall be issued to any vendor unless and until the City Manager, or
designee, certifies that there is to the credit of such office, department, or
agency, a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance to pay for the
supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services for which the contract
or order is to be issued.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 8.9 DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
   All checks, vouchers or warrants for the withdrawal of money from the City
depository shall be signed by the City Manager, and countersigned by the Mayor.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 8.10 SURETY BONDS.
   All employees of the City of Cleburne whose duties include the handling of
moneys belonging to the City of Cleburne shall, before entering upon the duties
of their office or employment, make bond in some responsible surety company
acceptable to the City Council for such amount as the Council may prescribe,
the premium of which bond shall be paid by the City; and the City Council may
also require any such surety bond to be further conditioned that the principal
thereon will faithfully perform and/or discharge the duties of office, and if
there are provisions of State law bearing upon the functions of the office
under which the execution of a surety bond is required, it shall be further
conditioned to comply therewith.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 8.11 LIABILITY OF OFFICERS OF THE CITY.
   Any officer of the City who shall divert or use the interest or sinking
funds for any purpose except that for which the fund is created or is expressly
authorized to be invested shall be liable and responsible to the City of
Cleburne in the full amount of such diversion and/or use, with lawful interest;
and in case such diversion or use is made or participated in by more than one
officer of the City the liability and responsibility therefore shall be joint
and several.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 8.12 INDEPENDENT ANNUAL AUDIT.
   The Council shall designate certified public accountants who shall make such
independent audits of accounts and other evidences of financial transactions of
the City government as the Council shall direct and submit their report to the
Council at such times and in such manner as the Council shall direct and in
compliance with the State and Federal laws.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 8.13 FINANCIAL STATEMENT.
   The City Council shall at least twenty days after the presentation of the
audit to the Council, and no later than twenty (20) days prior to the general
election, make available to the public print copies of the audit and post the
audit on the City's website.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
ARTICLE IX. TAXES AND TAXATION
Section 9.1 PROPERTY SUBJECT TO TAXATION.
   All real, personal and mixed property held, owned, or situated in the City
of Cleburne, which is not exempt by the Constitution or State law, shall be
liable for all taxes due by the owner thereof, including taxes on real estate,
franchise, personal, and mixed property.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 9.2 TAX LEVIES.
   The City Council shall have the power and it is hereby authorized and made
its duty to levy taxes for any lawful purpose. If for any cause the City
Council shall fail, neglect, or refuse to pass an ad valorem tax ordinance for
any one year, levying taxes for that year, then and in that event the tax-
levying ordinance last passed shall and will be considered in force and effect
as the tax-levying ordinance for the year for which the City Council failed,
neglected, or refused to pass such ordinance, and the failure so to pass such
ordinance for any year shall in no wise invalidate the tax collections for that
year.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 9.3 LIENS.
   The tax levied by the City is hereby declared to be a lien, charge, or
encumbrance upon the property upon which the tax is due, which lien, charge, or
encumbrance the City is entitled to enforce and foreclose in any court having
jurisdiction over the same, or in any other manner now or hereafter provided by
the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and the lien, charge, and
encumbrance on the property in favor of the City for the amount of the taxes
due on such property is such as to give the State courts jurisdiction to
enforce and foreclose said lien on the property on which the tax is due, not
only as against any resident of this State or person whose residence is
unknown, but also as against the unknown heirs of any person who owns the
property upon which the tax is due and also as against nonresidents. All taxes
upon real estate shall especially be a lien and a charge upon the property upon
which the taxes are due, which lien may be foreclosed in any court having
jurisdiction.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 9.4 CONTRACT FOR COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT TAXES.
   The City Council shall have the power to contract with any attorney-at-law
or any other competent person for the collection of delinquent taxes owing the
City.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
ARTICLE X. FRANCHISE AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
Section 10.1 REGULATION OF PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   The City of Cleburne shall have the power by ordinance to determine, fix,
and regulate the charges, fares, or rates of compensation to be charged by any
person, firm, or corporation enjoying a franchise in the City of Cleburne,
whether or not it is stated in the franchise ordinance, a grant, renewal,
extension, or amendment of a public utility franchise is subject to the right
of the City Council:
   (A)   To terminate the franchise by ordinance at any time for the failure of
the franchise holder to comply with the terms of the franchise, this power to
be exercised only after notice and hearing and an opportunity to correct the
default;
   (B)   To require expansion and extension of plant facilities that are
necessary to provide adequate service to the public and to maintain plant and
fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency;
   (C)   To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products
and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates;
   (D)   To impose regulations that insure safe, efficient, and continuous
service to the public;
   (E)   To examine and audit at any time during regular business hours the
accounts and records of the utility which relate to the City's regulation;
   (F)   To prescribe the form of accounts kept by each utility; provided, that
the utility is in compliance with this paragraph if it keeps its accounts in
accordance with the uniform system of accounts prescribed for the utility by a
Federal or State agency with regulatory authority over the utility;
   (G)   To require the utility to compensate the City for use of the City's
public rights-of-way and other public property;
   (H)   To require every franchisee to furnish within a reasonable time to the
City, without cost to the City, a general map, with updates outlining the
location, character, size, length, and terminals of all facilities of such
franchisee in, over, and underground of property in the City and to provide
detailed information on request in a format as specified by the City;
   (I)   To require the public utility to give notice to any subscriber to its
services prior to permanent or temporary discontinuance of such service by the
public utility, except in cases of emergency, and to require that no officer,
agent, servant, or employee of the public utility nor any vehicles under their
control shall make use of, go upon, or cross any private property without first
obtaining the permission of the owner or occupant, except in cases of
emergency, and to provide a penalty for the violation of such requirements;
   (J)   To impose other reasonable regulations, requirements, and conditions
as may be deemed necessary to promote the health, safety, welfare, or
accommodation of the public and to insure safe, efficient, and continuous
service to the public.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 10.2 TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.
   A public utility franchise may not be transferred without approval by
ordinance of the City Council. This restriction on transfer does not prevent
the franchise holder from pledging the franchise as security for a valid debt
or mortgage.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 10.3 FRANCHISES AND SPECIAL PRIVILEGES.
   (A)   The right to control easement, use, and ownership and title to the
streets, highways, public thoroughfares, and property of the City, its avenues,
parks, bridges, and all other public places and property, are hereby declared
to be inalienable except by ordinance duly passed by a majority of all members
of the City Council, and no grant of any franchise or lease, or right to use
the same, either on, through, along, across, under, or over the same, by any
private corporation, association, or individual shall be granted by the City
Council for a longer period than twenty (20) years.
   (B)   No franchise shall ever be granted until it has been, approved by a
majority of the City Council, after having been considered at three (3) regular
meetings of the City Council, nor shall any such franchise, grant or privilege
ever be made unless it provides for adequate compensation or consideration
therefore to be paid to the City.
   (C)   Every such franchise or grant shall make adequate provision, by way of
forfeiture of the grant or otherwise, to secure efficiency of public service at
reasonable rates and to maintain the property devoted to the public service in
good repair throughout the term of grant of said franchise.
   (D)   No franchise grant shall ever be exclusive.
   (E)   The City Council may prescribe the forms and methods of the keeping of
accounts of any grantees under franchise, provided that the forms and methods
of keeping such accounts have not already been prescribed by a State or Federal
agency.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 10.4 REGULATION OF RATES.
   (A)   The City Council has the power to fix and regulate the rates and
charges of all utilities and public services, as provided herein.
   (B)   Upon receiving written request from a utility or public service
requesting a change in rates, or upon a recommendation from the City that rates
for services provided by or owned by the City be changed, the City Council
shall consider the change.
   (C)   The utility must show the necessity for the change by an evidence
required by the City Council, including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Cost of its investment for service to the City;
      (2)   Amount and character of expenses and revenues connected with
rendering the service;
      (3)   Copies of any reports or returns filed with any State or Federal
regulatory agency within the last three years;
      (4)   Demonstration that the return on investment, if any, is within
State and Federal limitations.
   (D)   If not satisfied with the sufficiency of evidence, the City Council
may hire rate consultants, auditors and attorneys to investigate and, if
necessary, litigate requests for rate changes, the expense of which shall be
reimbursed to the City by the franchisee.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 10.5 CITY UTILITIES.
   Without limitation, the City shall have power to build, construct, purchase,
own, lease, maintain, and operate, within or without the city limits, light and
power systems, water systems, sewer systems, or sanitary disposal equipment and
appliances, natural gas systems, parks and swimming pools, fertilizer plants,
abattoirs, telephone, cable, transportation services, and any other public
service or utility; and all the powers which the City might exercise in
connection with such public utilities and public services including the power
to demand and receive compensation for service furnished for private purposes,
or otherwise, and with full and complete power and right of eminent domain
proper and necessary efficiently to carry out said objects.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 10.6 WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The City of Cleburne being the owner of its own water and sewer plants
and systems, it shall be the duty of the City Manager to faithfully execute all
the rules, regulations, charges, rates, and restrictions as now exist, or that
may hereafter be established and ordained by the City Council, with reference
to the use, consumption, waste, payment, cut off, turn on, connections, and the
general and detailed management of such plants and systems.
   (B)   The City Council shall fix, establish, change, and adjust the rates
and charges to the consumers of water and user of the sewer system, provided
that such rates and charges be sufficient to defray the cost of operating said
plants and systems, keeping, maintaining, improving, and extending the
facilities of such plants and systems to all parts of the City and to the
territory which may hereafter become a part of said City.
   (C)   The City of Cleburne may acquire by purchase, gift, condemnation, or
by any other means authorized by the laws of the State of Texas, lands and
property within and without the City, for use as a part of its water and sewer
plants and systems.
   (D)   All revenues and funds collected for or on account of the water and
sewer services shall forthwith be delivered by the person or persons collecting
same to the City Manager who shall forthwith deposit same with the City
Treasurer or City Depository to the account or credit of "Water and Sewer
Funds, City of Cleburne, Texas," and except for that portion thereof as may be
appropriated by the City Council for salaries and wages of officers and
employees of the Water and Sewer Department and the salary of the City Manager,
such funds shall be used only to pay the costs of operating, maintaining,
improving, and extending such plants and systems, and to pay the interest and
sinking funds on bonds issued for water and sewer purposes now outstanding or
that may hereafter be issued.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
Section 10.7 THE POWER TO BUY AND SELL GAS, ETC.
   The City shall have power to purchase electricity, gas, oil, or any other
article or service essential to a proper conduct of all the affairs of the City
and its inhabitants on such terms as the City Council may deem proper, for sale
and distribution to the inhabitants of the City or adjacent territory.
(Adopted by electorate, May 11, 2013)
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.19   Extraterritorial jurisdiction
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the municipality of Cleburne,
Texas shall be designated as the Code of Cleburne, Texas and may be so cited.
Cross-reference:
   Ordinances, §
3.15
   Procedure for passage of ordinances, §
3.16
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to adopt civil and criminal code, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat.,
Art. 1176a
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   ALDERMAN. The word “alderman” shall mean a member of the City Council.
('68 Code, § 1-2(b))
   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Cleburne, Texas.
   CITY OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS or AGENCIES. Whenever any officer,
depart-ment, board or agency is referred to in this Code, such reference shall
be construed as if followed by the words “of the City of Cleburne.”
('68 Code, § 1-2(b))
   CODE, THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES, or THIS CODE. This municipal code as modified
by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
   COUNCIL. The words “council” or “city council” shall mean the City Council
of Cleburne, constituting the governing body of the city.
('68 Code, § 1-2(b))
   COUNTY. Johnson County, Texas.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
   PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
   STATE. The State of Texas.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
   WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
   YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the words
YEAR OF OUR LORD.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the following
rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the City
Council or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)    AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this city for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   (A)   Generally. All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all
other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain
in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.
   (B)   Franchises. Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting the code
shall be deemed to affect the validity of any ordinance granting any franchise
or other right. Such ordinances are on file in the City Clerk's office and are
hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as
if set out at length herein.
('68 Code, § 1-4)
   (C)   Annexations and disannexations. Nothing in this code or the ordinance
adopting this code shall be deemed to affect the validity of any ordinance
annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the
city. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office and are hereby
recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set
out at length herein.
('68 Code, § 1-4)
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the City Council requiring publication shall take
effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly
provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their
passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   (1)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend,
repeal or in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent
ordinances repeal any chapter, section or division or any portion thereof, such
repealed portions may be excluded from the code by omission from reprinted
pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the
case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances
until such time that this code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted
are re-adopted as a new code by the City Council.
      (2)   (a)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be
made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of
this Code in the following language: “That section            of the Code of
Ordinances, City of Cleburne, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows: . .
. .” The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
         (b)   In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code
is to be added, the following language shall be used “That the Code of
Ordinances, City of Cleburne, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to
be numbered         , which the section reads as follows: . . . .” The new
section shall then be set out in full as desired.
('68 Code, § 1-3)
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 5-
1960-10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 1-1970-15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 1-1980-20,
passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 1-1985-25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 54.001) ('69 Code, § 1-2) (Ord. 1-1980-10,
passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 1-1985-20, passed 1-1-85).
      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This city shall make available to any person for inspection or copying
all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see Tex.
Loc. Gov't Code §§ 201.001 et seq.
§ 10.19 EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.
   Petitions for release.
   (A)   A petition for release or a petition to hold an election for release
from the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction may be filed by a resident or
land owner within the extraterritorial jurisdiction, as provided by Tex. Loc.
Gov't Code Ch. 42, as amended.
   (B)   A petition either for release or requesting an election is considered
filed when it meets the following requirements:
      (1)   The petition must comply with the signature requirements of Tex.
Loc. Gov't Code Ch. 42, as amended, and Tex. Election Code Ch. 277, as amended;
      (2)   The petition must include a map of the land to be released and
describe the boundaries of the land by either:
         (a)   Metes and bounds; or
         (b)   Lot and block number, if there is a recorded map or plat; and
      (3)   The petition must include a notarized signature by more than 50% of
all owners or registered voters within the area to be released; and
      (4)   If property is owned by an entity, estate, trust, or other
organization - the petition must be accompanied by the following:
         (a)   Date of birth of the signer;
         (b)   Personal residence address of the signer;
         (c)   The entity, estate, trust, or organization's Certificate of Good
Standing from the Texas Secretary of State, as applicable;
         (d)   The entity, estate, trust, or organization's articles of
incorporation, certificate of formation, partnership agreement, or other
formation document;
         (e)   The entity, estate, trust, or organization's bylaws;
         (f)   Resolution of the entity, estate, trust, or organization
authorizing the petition for release be executed and filed by the entity
representative on behalf of the entity, estate, trust, or organization; and
      (5)   If current ownership differs from data available on the Appraisal
District website, the petition must include deed(s) as proof of ownership;
      (6)   The petition must include the owner's signature acknowledging the
following in the following form: Owner of the property acknowledges that with
the submittal of this petition, that they may no longer assume they will have
the ability to receive City of Cleburne utility or emergency services for the
property being removed for the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the City
of Cleburne. This petition may also trigger CCN discountenance efforts by the
City of Cleburne; and
      (7)   The petition must include the property owner's signature lawfully
sworn to before a notary, accompanied by property tax identification number(s)
and physical address.
      (8)   The petition must be accompanied by a $200 fee.
   (C)   Upon receipt of a petition, the city must verify the petition.
      (1)   The city shall notify the resident and landowners of the area
described by the petition of its results. This may be satisfied by notifying
the party who filed the petition.
   (D)   If the petition for release contains the requisite number of
signatures and documents, the petition is considered filed and the city shall
release the area from its extraterritorial jurisdiction by the later of the
forty-fifth day after the date the petition was filed or the next meeting of
the City Council that occurs after the thirtieth date after the petition was
filed.
   (E)   If the resident or landowner submits a verified petition to hold an
election for release, the city may either:
      (1)   Voluntarily release the area for which the election is to be held
from the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction before the date on which the
election would have been held; or
      (2)   Order an election for release, which must comply with Texas
Election Code and Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Ch. 42, as amended.
   (F)   This section does not apply to the following properties in the
extraterritorial jurisdiction:
      (1)   In an area designated as an Industrial District under Tex. Loc.
Gov't Code § 42.044, as amended;
      (2)   In an area subject to a strategic partnership agreement with the
city; or
      (3)   Any other exceptions to release of an area by petition of a
landowner or resident as described by Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Ch. 42.
(Ord. 03-2024-14, passed 3-12-24)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited
or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or
whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is
provided therefore, the violation of any such provision of this code or any
such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500. Provided,
however, that a fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance, or
police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning, or public health and
sanitation other than dumping of refuse may not exceed $2,000; a fine or
penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance, or police regulation that
governs the dumping of refuse may not exceed $4,000. Notwithstanding the above
provision, no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for
the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. Each day any
violation of this code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense. In the event that any such violation is designated as a
nuisance under the provisions of this code, such nuisance may be summarily
abated by the city. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may
pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and
revocation of licenses or permits.
('68 Code, § 1-6) (Ord. passed 6-10-69; Am. Ord. 7-1991-21, passed 7-25-91; Am.
Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
Cross-reference:
   Authority to enforce ordinances by fine, see Charter §
3.15
Statutory reference:
   Maximum fine for general violations, see Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 54.001
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
30.   CITY GOVERNMENT
         
31.   BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND PUBLIC BODIES
         
32.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
         
33.   POLICE PROTECTION
         
34.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
         
35.   TAXATION AND FINANCE
         
36.   RECORDS MANAGEMENT
Cross-reference:
   City government, provisions concerning, see City Charter Fire protection,
Fire Department, officials and the like, see
Ch. 93
CHAPTER 30: CITY GOVERNMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Fiscal year
   
30.02   Corporate seal
   
30.03   Council meetings
   
30.04   Emergency action; city's liability
   
30.05   Tort liability
   
30.06   Master Plans adopted
Court
   
30.15   Court established; jurisdiction
   
30.16   Municipal Court Judge; vacancies; Associate Judge
   
30.17   Supervision and control of court
   
30.18   Appointment of Court Clerk, reporter, and court personnel; duties
   
30.19   Transcript preparation fee
   
30.20   Fines and special expenses
   
30.21   Municipal Court Building Security Fund
   
30.22   Municipal Court Technology Fund
   
30.23   Municipal Court Truancy Prevention and Diversion Fund
   
30.24   Municipal Court Juvenile Case Manager Fund
Elections
   
30.30   Ward boundaries
   
30.31   Name of voter must appear on official county registration list
   
30.32   Voters to vote in ward of residence; 30-day residence in ward required
Cross-reference:
   Bonds, see Charter
Art. VII
   Budget, see Charter
Art. VI
   City Manager, see Charter
Art. IV
   City not required to give security or execute bond, see Charter §
2.12
   Corporate and General Powers, see Charter
Art. II
   Finance Department, see Charter
Art. VIII
   Fire Department, see Charter §
4.1
   Housing Authority, see Charter §
2.9
   Incorporation and Territory, see Charter
Art. I
   Initiative, Referendum and Recall, see Charter
Art. V
   Oath of office, see Charter §
4.14
   Officers, Elections and City Council, see Charter
Art. III
   Personal interest, see Charter §
4.13
   Police Department, see Charter §
4.1
   Provisions relating to assignment, execution and garnishment, see Charter §
2.11
   Public library, see Charter §
2.1(C)(9)
   Publicity of record, see Charter §
4.12
   Taxes and Taxation, see Charter
Art. IX
   Water and Sewer Department, see Charter §
10.6
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the city shall begin on October 1 of each year and end on
September 30 of the following year.
('68 Code, § 2-1) (Ord. passed 6-14-51)
Cross-reference:
   Council to establish fiscal year, see Charter §
6.1
§ 30.02 CORPORATE SEAL.
   (A)   The corporate seal of the city shall be a circular disc with raised
edge and a five-pointed star in the center, the words “City of Cleburne,
Johnson County” shall surround the seal, and the letters “T-E-X-A-S” shall be
placed between the five points of the star.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the corporate seal and when
it is affixed to any instrument shall be the evidence of the authenticity of
such instrument.
('68 Code, § 2-2)
Cross-reference:
   Authority of city to use corporate seal, see Charter §
2.1(C)(2)
§ 30.03 COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the second Tuesday
of each month at such time as is fixed by the Council. Special meetings shall
be called by the City Clerk upon request of the mayor, the City Manager or a
majority of the members of the Council.
('68 Code, § 2-3)
Cross-reference:
   Council to meet at least once each month, see Charter §
3.12
§ 30.04 EMERGENCY ACTION; CITY'S LIABILITY.
   Every officer, agent or employee of the city, while responding to emergency
situations is authorized to act in such a manner as to most effectively deal
with the emergency. This provision shall prevail over every other ordinance of
the city and, to the extent to which the city has the authority to so
authorize, over any other law establishing a standard of care in conflict with
this section. Neither the city nor the employee shall be liable for any failure
to use ordinary care in such emergency.
('68 Code, § 2-6) (Ord. 6-1986-27, passed 6-10-86)
§ 30.05 TORT LIABILITY.
   (A)   Notice required. The city shall never be liable for any claim for
property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results in
death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf,
or in the event injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a
cause of action under the law by reason of such death or injury, shall, no
later than six months after the date the damage or injury was received, give
notice in writing of the following facts:
      (1)   The date and time when the injury occurred and the place where the
injured person or the property was at the time when the injury was received.
      (2)   The nature of the damage or injury sustained.
      (3)   The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained.
      (4)   A specific and detailed statement of how and under what
circumstances the damage or injury occurred.
      (5)   The amount for which each claimants settle.
      (6)   The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number,
city and state on the date the claim is presented.
      (7)   In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of
all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of the claimant
witnessed the happening of the injury or any part thereof and the names of the
doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed.
      (8)   In the case of properly damage, the location of the damaged
property at the time the claim was submitted along with the names and addresses
of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any part thereof.
   (B)   Delivery. All notices required by this section shall be effectuated by
serving them upon the City Secretary at the following location: 10 N. Robinson
Street, Cleburne, Texas 76033, and all such notices shall be effective only
when actually received in the office of the person named above.
   (C)   No waiver by Council. Neither the mayor, a City Councilmember, or any
other officer or employee of the city shall have the authority to waive any of
the provisions of this section.
   (D)   Verification. The written notice required under this section shall be
sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone authorized
by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required
herein shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify
the notice may be considered as a factor relating to the truth of the
allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein.
('68 Code, § 2-7) (Ord. 6-1986-26, passed 6-10-86; Am. Ord. 3-1991-9, passed 3-
12-91; Am. Ord. 12-2009-74, passed 12-8-09)
§ 30.06 MASTER PLANS ADOPTED.
   (A)   The City of Cleburne’s 2014 Comprehensive Plan entitled Plan Cleburne;
The Cleburne Comprehensive Plan, A Vision for the Future, A Roadmap for Growth
is hereby adopted and is incorporated into this code by reference.
   (B)   The 2014 Cleburne Downtown Master Plan, Planning a Sustainable Future
for Downtown, is hereby adopted and is incorporated into this code by
reference.
   (C)   The City of Cleburne’s 2022 Master Thoroughfare Plan is hereby adopted
and incorporated into this code by reference.
   (D)   The new Cleburne Parks, Recreation and Open Space Master Plan is
hereby adopted and incorporated into this code by reference.
   (E)   The Cleburne Regional Airport Master Plan is hereby adopted and
incorporated into this code by reference.
   (F)   The new Cleburne Cemeteries Master Plan is hereby adopted and
incorporated into this code by reference.
(Ord. 05-2014-48, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 08-2014-67, passed 8-12-14; Am. Ord.
02-2016-11, passed 2-23-16; Am. Ord. 12-2017-83, passed 12-12-17; Am. Ord. 09-
2021-50, passed 9-14-21; Am. Ord. 02-2022-21, passed 2-22-22; Am. Res. 04-2021-
54, passed 4-27-21; Am. Ord. 12-2022-84, passed 12-13-22; Am. Res. 01-2024-21,
passed 1-23-24)
COURT
§ 30.15 COURT ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The City Council hereby establishes the Cleburne Municipal Court as a
municipal court of record in order to provide a more efficient disposition of
cases arising in the city, and in order to more effectively enforce the
ordinances of the city. The Municipal Court shall become a court of record from
and after the effective date of this section, and shall be known as “The
Municipal Court of Record in the City of Cleburne.”
   (B)   The Municipal Court of record has the jurisdiction provided by Tex.
Gov't Code Ch. 30 for municipal courts of record.
   (C)   This Municipal Court of record is established pursuant to the
authority granted in Tex. Gov't Code Ch. 30, Subchaper A, known as the Uniform
Municipal Courts of Record Act, and the terms set forth in that Act are hereby
adopted governing the operation of the court.
('68 Code, § 9-1) (Am. Ord. 03-2013-11, passed 3-12-13)
Cross-reference:
   Municipal court, see Charter §
4.9
§ 30.16 MUNICIPAL COURT JUDGE; VACANCIES; ASSOCIATE JUDGE.
   (A)   The Judge of the Municipal Court of record in the city shall be
appointed by the City Council by ordinance as required by Tex. Gov't Code §
30.00006(b). The Municipal Judge must be a licensed attorney in good standing
in the state, and must have two or more years of experience in the practice of
law in Texas. The Judge must be a citizen of the U.S. and of the state. The
City Council shall establish the salary of the Judge, which shall not be based
directly or indirectly on fines or costs collected by the court. The salary may
not be diminished during the term for which the Judge is appointed.
   (B)   If a vacancy occurs in the office of a Municipal Judge of a court of
record, the City Council shall by ordinance appoint a qualified person to fill
the office for the remainder of the unexpired term. The City Council may
appoint one or more qualified persons as an Associate Judge to be available to
serve for a Municipal Judge who is temporarily absent due to illness, family
death, continuing legal or judicial education programs, or any other reason.
The Municipal Judge shall select one of the qualified persons appointed by the
City Council to serve during the absence of the Municipal Judge. The Associate
Judge, while serving as a Municipal Judge, has all the powers and shall
discharge all the duties of a Municipal Judge. An Associate Judge must meet the
qualifications prescribed for the Municipal Judge. The City Council shall set
the compensation for the Associate Judge.
('68 Code, § 9-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-70; Am. Ord. 02-2011-03, passed 2-22-11;
Am. Ord. 03-2013- 11, passed 3-12-13)
Cross-reference:
   Municipal Court Judge, see Charter §
4.10
§ 30.17 SUPERVISION AND CONTROL OF COURT.
   The Municipal Judge shall supervise and control the operation and clerical
functions of the administrative department of the Municipal Court, including
the court’s personnel, during the proceedings or docket of the court. At all
other times, the operation and clerical functions of the administrative
department of the Municipal Court shall be under the supervision and direction
of the City Manager or his or her designee.
('68 Code, § 9-3) (Ord. passed 8-11-70; Am. Ord. 03-2013-11, passed 3-12-13)
§ 30.18 APPOINTMENT OF COURT CLERK, REPORTER AND COURT PERSONNEL; DUTIES.
   (A)   The office of Clerk of the Municipal Court of the city is created. The
City Manager or his or her designee shall appoint a Clerk of the Municipal
Court of record who shall perform duties in accordance with state law and city
ordinances. The Clerk shall be accountable to the City Manager or their
designee, who in turn shall report on the actions of the Clerk to the City
Council. During proceedings of the court, the Clerk and other court personnel
shall serve at the direction of the Municipal Court Judge. At all other times
they shall serve at the direction and supervision of the City Manager who shall
have the authority to remove the Court Clerk or other court personnel. The
removal of the Clerk shall be by the City Manager with the approval of the City
Council. The Clerk of the Municipal Court of record shall keep the records of
the municipal court of record, issue subpoenas or other process, and perform
the duties described in Tex. Gov't Code § 30.00009.
   (B)   The proceedings of trials in Municipal Court of record shall be
recorded by a good quality electronic recording device and kept for a period of
21 days after the last day of the court proceedings, trial, or denial of a
motion for new trial, whichever occurs last. If the case is appealed, the
proceedings shall be transcribed from the recording by an official court
reporter. The Municipal Court Clerk shall appoint a court reporter who must
meet the qualifications provided by law for official court reporters.
   (C)   The Court Clerk shall supervise the selection of persons for jury
service in the Municipal Court of record.
('68 Code, § 9-4) (Ord. passed 8-11-70; Am. Ord. 03-2013-11, passed 3-12-13)
§ 30.19 TRANSCRIPT PREPARATION FEES.
   In the event of an appeal, the appellant shall pay a transcript preparation
fee in the amount of $25. The transcript preparation fee does not include the
fee for an actual transcript of the proceedings, which the appellant must pay.
The Clerk shall note the payment of the transcript preparation fee on the
docket of the court. If the case is reversed on the appeal, the transcript
preparation fee shall be refunded to the appellant. In addition to the
transcript preparation fee, the fee for the actual transcript of the
proceedings and statement of facts must be paid by the appellant.
(Ord. 2-1984-07, passed 2-14-84; Am. Ord. 03-2013-11, passed 3-12-13)
§ 30.20 FINES AND SPECIAL EXPENSES.
   (A)   The Municipal Court may enforce the collection of fines imposed by it,
by execution against the property of the defendant, or by imprisonment of the
defendant, in the same manner as provided for justice courts by the laws of the
state, including issuance of writs of execution and warrants of arrest in
furtherance thereof.
   (B)   No court costs shall be assessed in, or charged against any defendant
in, or cause pending in, the Municipal Court except as authorized in this
section or as expressly authorized by state law.
   (C)   A special expense not to exceed $25 may be assessed and collected for
the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest for an offense of failure to
appear under Tex. Penal Code § 38.10, or under Tex. Trans. Code § 543.009, or
under Tex. Code Crim. Proc. Article 17.04, relative to a personal bond to
appear.
   (D)   A special expense not to exceed $10 or the actual expense incurred for
service performed in such cases, whichever is less, may be assessed and
collected in cases in the Municipal Court in which the laws of the state
require that the case be dismissed because of actions by or on behalf of the
defendant which were subsequent to the date of the alleged offense, such
actions being limited to compliance with the provisions of Tex. Trans. Code §§
543.102 to 543.104.
(Ord. 03-2013-11, passed 3-12-13)
§ 30.21 MUNICIPAL COURT BUILDING SECURITY FUND.
   (A)   Any person convicted in the City of Cleburne Municipal Court shall pay
a three dollar ($3.00) security fee as a cost of court to be collected by the
Clerk of the Court.
   (B)    For the purpose of this section, a person is considered convicted if:
      (1)   The sentence is imposed on the person.
      (2)   The person receives community supervision, including deferred
adjudication; or
      (3)   The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the Municipal Court Building Security
Fund may be used only to finance the following items, when used for the purpose
of providing security services for the city or any other city of Cleburne
Municipal Court, which may hereafter be created:
      (1)   The purchase or repair of X-ray machines and conveying systems;
      (2)   Handheld metal detectors;
      (3)   Walkthrough metal detectors;
      (4)   Identification cards and systems;
      (5)   Electronic looking and surveillance equipment;
      (6)   Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security
personnel during times when they are providing security services;
      (7)   Signage;
      (8)   Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems;
      (9)   Locks, chains, or other security hardware; or
      (10)    Any other lawful item or service for which the said funds may be
expended.
   (D)    For the purposes of this section, the Municipal Court Building
Security Fund shall be administered by the governing body who shall receive
recommendations for administering the fund from the City Manager.
(Ord. 6-1996-27, passed 6-25-96; Am. Ord. 10-1999-110, passed 10-12-99; Am.
Ord. 11-1999-115, passed 11-1-99)
§ 30.22 MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND.
   (A)   Any person convicted in the City of Cleburne Municipal Court shall pay
a $4.00 technology fund fee as a cost of court to be collected by the Clerk of
the Court.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, a person is considered convicted if:
      (1)   A sentence is imposed on the person;
      (2)   The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred
adjudication community supervision; or the court defers final disposition of
the person's case.
   (C)   The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on
or after this section is adopted.
   (D)   The Clerk of Court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the
municipal treasurer of the city, who shall deposit the fee into the Municipal
Court Technology Fund.
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the Municipal Court Technology Fund
shall be used only to finance the purchase of technology enhancements for the
Municipal Court of the city, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Computer systems, networks, hardware and/or software;
      (2)   imaging systems;
      (3)   electronic kiosks and/or ticket writers; or
      (4)   docket management systems.
   (F)   The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City
Council, as authorized by Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure, Art. 102.0172
(effective September 1, 2003).
(Ord. 10-1999-110, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 11-1999-115, passed 11-1-99; Am.
Ord. 01-2005-01, passed 1-11-05)
§ 30.23 MUNICIPAL COURT TRUANCY PREVENTION AND DIVERSION FUND.
   (A)   Any person convicted in the City of Cleburne Municipal Court of any
offense, other than an offense relating to a pedestrian or the parking of a
motor vehicle, shall pay a $2.00 truancy prevention and diversion fund fee as a
cost of court to be collected by the Clerk of the Court for promoting juvenile
recidivism and diversion programs.
   (B)   The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City
Council, as authorized by Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure, Art. 102.015.
(Ord. 12-2013-89, passed 12-10-13)
§ 30.24 MUNICIPAL COURT JUVENILE CASE MANAGER FUND.
   (A)   A defendant convicted of a fine-only misdemeanor offense in Municipal
Court shall pay a fee, not to exceed $5, as a court cost. For purposes of this
section, a person is considered to be convicted if:
      (1)   A sentence or judgement or both are imposed on the defendant by the
court;
      (2)   The defendant received deferred disposition from the court,
including deferred proceedings under Art. 45.051 or 45.052, Tex. Code of
Criminal Procedure; or
      (3)   The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgement
and sentence.
   (B)   The Municipal Court Judge is authorized to waive the Juvenile Case
Manager Fee in cases of demonstrated financial hardship on the part of a
convicted defendant, if the defendant is: indigent, has insufficient resources
or income to pay the fee, or is otherwise unable to pay all or part of the
underlying fine or costs.
   (C)   The Municipal Court Clerks shall collect the fee and it shall be
deposited in a separate fund known as the Juvenile Case Manager Fund, as
established under this section.
   (D)   The fund may be used to finance the salary, benefits, training, travel
expenses, office supply expenses and other related expenses of a Juvenile Case
Manager that is employed by the Municipal Court under Tex. Code of Criminal
Procedure, Art. 45.056, and may not be used to supplement the income of an
employee whose primary role is not that of a juvenile case manager.
   (E)   The fund may also be utilized, after financing the costs of the
juvenile case manager, and on approval by the employing court, a juvenile case
manager may direct the remaining money to be used to implement programs
directly related to the duties of the juvenile case manager, including juvenile
alcohol and substance abuse programs, educational and leadership programs, and
any other projects designed to prevent or reduce the number of juvenile
referrals to the court.
   (F)   Upon approval of the City Council, the Municipal Court is authorized
to employ one or more full-time or part-time juvenile case managers, to provide
services in cases involving juvenile offenders before the court, and in
supervising court orders in juvenile cases.
   (G)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $2,000 for each
offense.
(Ord. 10-2015-70, passed 10-13-15)
ELECTIONS
§ 30.30 WARD BOUNDARIES.
   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be deemed to
affect the validity of any ordinance dividing the city into wards and fixing
the boundaries of such wards. Such ordinances are on file in the City Clerk's
office and are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same
extent as if set out herein at length.
('68 Code, § 10-1)
Cross-reference:
   Creation and change of municipal district boundaries, see Charter §
1.2
§ 30.31 NAME OF VOTER MUST APPEAR ON OFFICIAL COUNTY REGISTRATION LIST.
   No person shall be allowed to vote in any city election unless his name
appears on the official registration list prepared in the office of the County
Tax Assessor and Collector.
('68 Code, § 10-3) (Ord. passed 11-9-65)
§ 30.32 VOTERS TO VOTE IN WARD OF RESIDENCE; 30-DAY RESIDENCE IN WARD REQUIRED.
   A person who is duly registered in the manner provided in this chapter may
vote in a city election in the ward in which he resides, provided that he has
resided in the ward for at least 30 days before such election.
('68 Code, § 10-4) (Ord. passed 11-9-65)
CHAPTER 31: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND PUBLIC BODIES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Application of provisions
   
31.02   Membership to have broad community base
   
31.03   Residency and citizenship requirements
   
31.04   City employees and relatives of Councilmembers ineligible
   
31.05   Members not to serve on more than one board
   
31.06   Minimum number of members; length of terms
   
31.07   Appointment and acceptance to be in writing
   
31.08   Members to disclose known conflict of interest
   
31.09   (Reserved)
   
31.10   Removal of members for excessive absence from meetings
   
31.11   City Manager to notify Council of expiration of terms and vacancies;
when new appointments to be made
Main Street Advisory Board
   
31.25   Board established
   
31.26   Membership
   
31.27   Duties
   
31.28   Role of city staff
   
31.29   Subcommittees
   
31.30   Expenses
   
31.31   Duration
Department of Economic Development
   
31.50   Creation
Historic Preservation Commission
   
31.61   Purpose
   
31.62   Definitions
   
31.63   Commission established
   
31.64   Historic Preservation Officer
Cross-reference:
   Airport Board, see §§
90.105 et seq.
   Building and Standards Commission, see §§
150.144 through
150.150
   Electrical Board, see §
150.056
   Library Board, see §§
97.15 et seq.
   Park and Recreation Board, see §§
98.015 et seq.
   Planning and Zoning Commission, see
Ch. 153
   Texas Cooperative Electrical Examining Board, see §
150.075
Editor's note:
   The provisions for the city Animal Shelter Advisory Board have not been
included in this Code of Ordinances; however, this board remains in operation
within the city.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all boards or commissions
of the city heretofore created and which may be created in the future with the
exception of the Equalization Board, the Civil Service Commission and the
Cleburne Industrial Development Corporation.
('68 Code, § 2-42) (Ord. passed 6-23-66; Am. Ord. 5-1981-17, passed 5-12-81;
Am. Ord. 4-1991-11, passed 4-25-91)
§ 31.02 MEMBERSHIP TO HAVE BROAD COMMUNITY BASE.
   The City Council is required to appoint members to boards and commissions
from the broadest possible base of the community, except as may otherwise be
provided for advisory boards. In order that such boards and commissions are
truly citizen's boards and commissions as near as practicable, at least 50% of
all members shall be public members whose businesses or professions are not
related directly to the affairs conducted by the board or commission.
('68 Code, § 2-43) (Ord. passed 6-23-66)
§ 31.03 RESIDENCY AND CITIZENSHIP REQUIREMENTS.
   All boards and commissions must be composed of registered voters who reside
either in the city or within the territories subject to the jurisdiction of the
respective boards and commissions, except for the Layland Museum Advisory Board
and Library Advisory Board, which shall have nine members who are registered
voters; five must reside in the city, but the remaining four may reside outside
the city limits but within Johnson County.
('68 Code, § 2-44) (Ord. passed 6-23-66; Am. Ord. 2-2002-12, passed 2-26-02;
Am. Ord. 01-2008-02, passed 1-8-08; Am. Ord. 02-2009-07, passed 2-10-09)
Cross-reference:
   Authority of council to create boards and commissions, see Charter §
3.10(E)
§ 31.04 CITY EMPLOYEES AND RELATIVES OF COUNCIL MEMBERS INELIGIBLE.
   Employees of the city may not serve as members of city board and
commissions, except in the case of boards required by ordinance to be composed
of employees, nor may relatives of City Councilmembers serve as members of
boards and commissions.
('68 Code, § 2-45) (Ord. passed 6-23-66)
§ 31.05 MEMBERS NOT TO SERVE ON MORE THAN ONE BOARD.
   Members of boards or commissions may not sit on more than one board or
commission at one time. However, although a member has previously served on one
board, he or she is not disqualified from serving on any board at a later time.
('68 Code, § 2-46) (Ord. passed 6-23-66; Am. Ord. 5-1981-17, passed 5-12-81)
§ 31.06 MINIMUM NUMBER OF MEMBERS; LENGTH, OF TERMS.
   All boards and commissions shall be composed of at least three members and
the maximum length of a term of any member shall be two years. A citizen may
serve more than one consecutive term(s) on the same board, and may serve more
than once on that board.
('68 Code, § 2-47) (Ord. passed 6-23-66; Am. Ord. 5-1981-17, passed 5-12-81;
Am. Ord. 06-2022-45, passed 6-14-22)
§ 31.07 APPOINTMENT AND ACCEPTANCE TO BE IN WRITING.
   Appointments to boards and commissions and acceptances of such appointments
must be in writing.
('68 Code, § 2-48) (Ord. passed 6-23-66)
§ 31.08 MEMBERS TO DISCLOSE KNOWN CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   Any member of a board or commission of the city, considered advisory in
nature, having substantial interest in a business entity or real property, as
those terms are defined in Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Ch. 171 as it now reads or may
hereafter be amended, shall comply with Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Ch. 171 and, if
necessary, shall abstain from voting on a matter involving the business entity
or real property and file and affidavit setting forth the substantial interest
in the matter to be voted upon.
('68 Code, § 2-49) (Ord. passed 6-23-66; Am. Ord. 08-2005-51, passed 8-23-05)
§ 31.09 (RESERVED)
§ 31.10 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS FOR EXCESSIVE ABSENCE FROM MEETINGS.
   The City Council may remove a member from a board or commission who misses
three consecutive meetings.
('68 Code, § 2-51) (Ord. passed 6-23-66; Am. Ord. 5-1981-17, passed 5-12-81)
§ 31.11 CITY MANAGER TO NOTIFY COUNCIL OF EXPIRATION OF TERMS AND VACANCIES;
WHEN NEW APPOINTMENTS TO BE MADE.
   The City Manager is required to notify the City Council, through the agenda,
of the expiration of terms of appointments, or vacancies, in the membership of
boards and commissions. The Council will then make appointments in writing on
forms providing biographical data and qualifications at the first regular
meeting following the notification of a vacancy or expiration of term.
('68 Code, § 2-52) (Ord. passed 6-23-66)
MAIN STREET ADVISORY BOARD
§ 31.25 BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   There is established the Main Street Advisory Board, which may consist of 9
to 15 members appointed by the City Council to two-year terms, with the
exception that when the first appointments are made, one-half plus one shall be
appointed for three year terms.
('68 Code, § 2-134) (Ord. 3-1992-7, passed 3-26-92; Am. Ord. 2-1993-4, passed
2-9-93; Am. Ord. 2-1995-4, passed 2-28-95)
Statutory reference:
   For provisions pertaining to the Main Street Program, see Tex. Gov't Code §
442.014
§ 31.26 MEMBERSHIP.
   In selecting members, the Council shall consider but not be bound by
recommendations of civic groups and business associations. Before making
appointments the Mayor may contact such groups for suggestions. Notwithstanding
the residency requirements of §
31.25, the City Council may appoint nonresidents of the city to serve on the
Main Street Advisory Board if such nonresident works in the Main Street project
area, has a substantial interest in the Main street target area or if the
interests of the Main Street project would be better served thereby.
('68 Code, § 2-135) (Ord. 3-1992-7, passed 3-26-92)
§ 31.27 DUTIES.
   The Main Street Advisory Board is charged with the responsibility of
assisting the Main Street Project Manager, the City Manager, the Mayor, and the
City Council to set specific long and short term goals for the Main Street
Project. The Board shall make recommendations on all matters affecting the Main
Street target area, including, but not limited to, parking, transportation,
business and development, building and landscape design, public works,
promotions and definition of the geographic area to be included in the Main
Street project area.
('68 Code, § 2-136) (Ord. 3-1992-7, passed 3-26-92)
§ 31.28 ROLE OF CITY STAFF.
   The project manager is accountable directly to the City Manager. The City
Manager shall have sole authority to assign duties to the Project Manager.
Implementation of any and all goals recommended by the Advisory Board is
subject to approval by the City Manager.
('68 Code, § 2-137) (Ord. 3-1992-7, passed 3-26-92)
§ 31.29 SUBCOMMITTEES.
   The Board may assist in achieving approved Main Street goals by staffing
working subcommittees which execute certain Main Street projects. Such
committees shall be chaired by an Advisory Board member, but committee
membership may include other members of the community as necessary to
accomplish the goals of the Advisory Board. The nature of the Main Street
projects work makes it appropriate for volunteer services. To the fullest
extent possible volunteers will be used in the work of the Board.
('68 Code, § 2-138) (Ord. 3-1992-7, passed 3-26-92)
§ 31.30 EXPENSES.
   Members of the Main Street Advisory Board and subcommittee members shall
serve without pay. No out-of-pocket expenses incurred shall be reimbursed
unless, before incurring the expense, the member or subcommittee member obtains
authorization of the City Manager upon recommendation of the Project Manager.
The Board is authorized to raise funds on behalf of the Main Street Program for
the purpose of accomplishing the goals of the Advisory Board. Such funds can be
used to defray costs of achieving the goals set by the board and shall be kept
separate and apart from the general funds of the city. The fund balances shall
be carried forward from year to year during the existence of the Main Street
program.
('68 Code, § 2-139) (Ord. 3-1992-7, passed 3-26-92)
§ 31.31 DURATION.
   The Main Street Advisory Board shall continue from year to year so long as
Cleburne is designated as a Main Street project city by the Texas Historical
Commission.
('68 Code, § 2-140) (Ord. 3-1992-7, passed 3-26-92)
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
§ 31.50 CREATION.
   The Department of Economic Development is hereby created.
(Ord. 04-2003-16, passed 4-22-03)
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
§ 31.61 PURPOSE.
   It is recognized that the city represents the unique confluence of time,
land, and place that shaped the identity of generations of citizens,
collectively and individually, and produced significant historic,
architectural, and cultural resources that constitute their heritage. This
Commission has been established to provide for the protection, enhancement, and
perpetuation of structures and areas of historical and cultural importance and
significance. It also proposes to promote the economic, cultural, educational
and general welfare of the public.
(Ord. 10-2005-71, passed 10-25-05)
§ 31.62 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, when used in this subchapter, shall take precedence and
shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless
the context of this subchapter clearly indicates otherwise. To the extent words
used in this subchapter are defined by §
155.81 of this code, those definitions are incorporated into this section by
reference. Words that are not defined in this subchapter shall have the meaning
as defined by the city.
   HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT. An area of the city designated by ordinance
of the City Council which possesses within definable geographic boundaries, a
significant concentration, linkage or continuity of sites, buildings or
structures united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical
development.
(Ord. 10-2005-71, passed 10-25-05; Am. Ord. 01-2020-07, passed 1-28-20)
§ 31.63 COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby created the Cleburne Historic Preservation
Commission (Commission), which shall consist of five members of the City
Council of the City of Cleburne.
   (B)   Terms of office. Commission member's term of office shall run
concurrently with the term of City Council.
   (C)   Officer. The Mayor of the City of Cleburne shall serve as the
Chairperson, and the Mayor Pro-Tem shall serve as the Vice-Chairperson.
   (D)   Meetings. The Commission shall meet at least monthly, if business is
at hand. Special meetings may be called at any time by the Chairman (or Mayor)
or on the written request of any two Commission members. All meetings shall be
held in conformance with Tex. Gov’t Code Ch. 551.
   (E)   Quorum. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of not
less than a majority of the full authorized membership.
   (F)   Powers and duties. 
      (1)   Prepare rules and procedures as necessary to carry out the business
of the Historic Preservation Commission.
      (2)   Establish criteria for the designation of historic, architectural,
and cultural landmarks and the delineation of Historic Preservation Districts.
      (3)   Conduct surveys and maintain, with the city, an inventory of
significant historic, architectural and cultural landmarks and all properties
located in the Historical Preservation District.
      (4)   Conferral of recognition to the owners of designated historic
landmarks or properties within designated Historic Preservation Districts by
means of certificates, plaques or markers.
      (5)   Increase public awareness of the value of historic, cultural and
architectural preservation by developing and participating in public education
programs.
      (6)   Designation of sites, buildings, structures, objects or areas as
landmarks and Historic Preservation Districts.
      (7)   Develop design standards and guidelines relating to development and
construction criteria for historic structures and landmarks.
      (8)   Utilization of state, federal, or private funds to promote the
preservation of landmarks and Historic Preservation Districts within the city.
      (9)   Maintain written minutes of each meeting to be filed in the office
of the City Secretary.
      (10)   Prepare an annual report summarizing the previous year's work and
accomplishments.
(Ord. 10-2005-71, passed 10-25-05; Am. Ord. 01-2020-07, passed 1-28-20)
§ 31.64 HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER.
   The City Manager shall designate a staff member or an appropriate resident
of the city as the Historic Preservation Officer. The Historic Preservation
Officer shall administer this subchapter and advise the Commission on related
matters.
(Ord. 10-2005-71, passed 10-25-05)
CHAPTER 32: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
32.01   Emergency Management Director
   
32.02   Emergency Management Coordinator
   
32.03   Authority to participate in county-wide emergency management plan
   
32.04   Emergency management organization
   
32.05   Orders, rules and regulations to supersede existing regulations
   
32.06   Immunity of agents or representatives of city government
   
32.07   Property owners granting license of privilege not civilly liable
   
32.08   Expenditures of public funds
   
32.09   Obstruction of emergency management personnel prohibited
   
32.10   Oath
   
32.11   Unauthorized warning and all-clear signals prohibited
 
   
32.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Emergency management, municipal programs, see Tex. Gov't Code § 418.103
§ 32.01 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Office created. There exists the office of Emergency Management
Director of the city, which shall be held by the Mayor in accordance with state
law.
   (B)   Responsibilities generally. The Director shall be responsible for
conducting a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and
for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in division (D) of
this section. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the
coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with
the Director.
   (C)   Powers and duties generally. The powers and duties of the Director
shall include an on-going survey of actual or potential major hazards which
threaten life and property within the city; and an on-going program of
identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which
would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a
disaster did occur. As part of his responsibility in hazard mitigation, the
Director shall supervise the development of an emergency management plan for
the city, and shall recommend that plan for adoption by the City Council along
with any and all mutual aid plans and agreements which are deemed essential for
the implementation of such emergency management plan. The powers of the
Director shall include the authority to declare a state of disaster, but such
action may be subject to confirmation by the City Council at its next meeting.
The duties of the Director shall also include the causing of a survey of the
availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which
could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein, as well as a
continuing study of the need for amendments and improvements in the emergency
management plan.
   (D)   Duties and responsibilities enumerated. The duties and
responsibilities of the Emergency Management Director shall include the
following:
      (1)   The direction and control of the actual disaster operations of the
Cleburne Emergency Management Organization as well as the training of emergency
management personnel.
      (2)   The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility
that may arise within the emergency management organizations.
      (3)   The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, county,
district, state, regional, federal or other emergency management organizations.
      (4)   The marshalling, after declaration of a disaster as provided for
above, of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of
the city to aid in the carrying out of the provision of the emergency
management plan.
      (5)   The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of
a disaster and the immediate operational effectiveness of the city emergency
management plan.
      (6)   The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations or directives which
are necessary for the protection of life and property in the city. Such rules
and regulations shall be filed in the office of the City Secretary and shall
receive widespread publicity unless publicity would be of aid and comfort to
the enemy.
      (7)   The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid
agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other
local political subdivision of the state, and the drafting and execution, if
deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located
and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide
coordination of emergency management efforts.
      (8)   The supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of
all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private
contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency
management within the city.
      (9)   The authorizing of agreements, after approval by the City Attorney,
for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes.
('68 Code, § 7-1) (Ord. 8-1983-29, passed 6-14-83)
§ 32.02 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR.
   An Emergency Management Coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the
pleasure of the Director.
('68 Code, § 7-2) (Ord. 8-1983-29, passed 6-14-83)
§ 32.03 AUTHORITY TO PARTICIPATE IN COUNTY-WIDE EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   The Mayor is authorized to join with the County Judge and the mayors of the
other cities in the county in the formation of an emergency management council
for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of
a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a Joint Emergency
Management Coordinator, as well as all power necessary to participate in a
county-wide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect
the city, without abrogating the on-going program of the city.
('68 Code, § 7-3) (Ord. 8-1983-29, passed 6-14-83)
§ 32.04 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.
   The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist
of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the Director in the
emergency management plan, as well as all organized volunteer groups. The
functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such
officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management
plan. Such plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and
designate divisions and functions, assign tasks, duties and powers, and
designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall
conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management of
the state and of the federal government.
('68 Code, § 7-4) (Ord. 8-1983-29, passed 6-14-83)
§ 32.05 ORDERS, RULES AND REGULATIONS TO SUPERSEDE EXISTING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and
promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede
and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as
the latter may be inconsistent therewith.
   (B)   This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state
or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or regulation.
('68 Code, § 7-5) (Ord. 8-1983-29, passed 6-14-83)
§ 32.06 IMMUNITY OF AGENTS OR REPRESENTATIVES OF CITY GOVERNMENT.
   This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for
the protection of the public peace, health and safety and neither the city, the
agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm,
partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents
thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply
with, any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result
of the activity.
('68 Code, § 7-6) (Ord. 8-1983-29, passed 6-14-83)
§ 32.07 PROPERTY OWNERS GRANTING LICENSE OF PRIVILEGE NOT CIVILLY LIABLE.
   Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who
voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege,
or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any
part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering
persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack shall, together
with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death
of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under
such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the
property of such person.
('68 Code, § 7-7) (Ord. 8-1983-29, passed 6-14-83)
§ 32.08 EXPENDITURES OF PUBLIC FUNDS.
   No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in
carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter
without prior approval by the City Council, nor shall any person have any right
to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific
approval of the City Council.
('68 Code, § 7-8) (Ord. 8-1983-29, passed 6-14-83)
§ 32.09 OBSTRUCTION OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PERSONNEL PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay
any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any
rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden
by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this
chapter. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display
any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the
emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has
been granted to such person by the proper officials.
('68 Code, § 7-9) (Ord. 8-1983-29, passed 6-14-83)
Penalty, see § 32.99
§ 32.10 OATH.
   Each employee or any individual that is assigned a function or
responsibility shall solemnly swear or affirm to support and defend the
Constitution of the United States, laws of the State of Texas and the
ordinances of the city.
('68 Code, § 7-10) (Ord. 8-1983-29, passed 6-14-83)
§ 32.11 UNAUTHORIZED WARNING AND ALL-CLEAR SIGNALS PROHIBITED.
   Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to
simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed
guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties
imposed by this chapter.
('68 Code, § 7-11) (Ord. 8-1983-29, passed 6-14-83)
Penalty, see § 32.99
§ 32.99 PENALTY.
   Convictions for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable by fine not to exceed $500.
('68 Code, § 7-12) (Ord. 8-1983-29, passed 6-14-83; Am. Ord. 7-1991-21, passed
7-25-91)
CHAPTER 33: POLICE PROTECTION
Section
   
33.01   Police identification register
   
33.02   Work periods established
   
33.03   Police reserve force
   
33.04   Use of police station property for certain activity
Cross-reference:
   Fire protection, see
Ch. 93
   Traffic code, see
Title VII
§ 33.01 POLICE IDENTIFICATION REGISTER.
   (A)   There is created a police identification register which shall be
maintained by the Police Department of the city for the purpose of registering
and recording identification numbers which have been assigned by the Police
Department to private individuals or businesses in the city for use in
identifying their articles of personal property for protection against loss,
theft or burglary and as a means of identification and recovery of such items
if lost or stolen. Participation in the police identification number program
shall be on a voluntary basis and at the option of the citizen.
   (B)   As used in this section the term POLICE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER shall
mean a number or a combination of digits and letters which has been assigned by
the Police Department to a particular person or business for the purpose of
identifying articles of personal property, which number shall have been
recorded and registered in the police identification register, and which has
been permanently inscribed, etched, affixed or attached to an item of personal
property by the owner for the purpose of identifying same.
('68 Code, § 19-25(a),(b)) (Ord. 3-1973-12, passed 3-13-72; Am. Ord. 7-1991-21,
passed 7-25-91)
Cross-reference:
   Altering or defacing police identification number, see §
130.17
§ 33.02 WORK PERIODS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The work period for all sworn members of the Police Department shall
be a 14 consecutive day, 80 hour work week. All non-exempt employees shall be
compensated at a rate of one and one-half times the regular rate of pay for all
hours worked in excess of 80 within the work period.
   (B)   The beginning and ending of the 14 day work period will be established
by city policy and may be changed, provided the change is intended to be
permanent and not designed to evade overtime compensation.
(Ord. 01-2014-07, passed 1-28-14)
§ 33.03 POLICE RESERVE FORCE.
   (A)   Established. There is hereby established a police reserve force to be
known as the Cleburne Police Reserve, such force to be separate and distinct
from the Police Department.
   (B)   Regulation by Chief of Police.
      (1)   The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Reserve, and
the members of the Reserve shall be under the authority, control and command of
the Chief of Police, subject to all of the provisions of the City Charter,
ordinances of the city, and laws of the state.
      (2)   The Chief of Police may, by order, establish rules and regulations
governing the Police Reserve, to fix specific duties of its members, and to
provide for the maintenance of discipline.
   (C)   Composition. The Police Reserve shall be composed of personnel who
have volunteered to join the organization, and whose applications have been
accepted by the Chief of Police. The total strength of the Police Reserve shall
not exceed 30 members.
   (D)   Appointment. The Chief of Police shall appoint the members of the
Police Reserve. Members serve at the Chief's discretion. Application for
membership in the Police Reserve shall be filed with the Police Department on a
form prescribed by the Chief of Police. Selections of eligible applicants
chosen to serve as Reserve Police Officers are subject to state and local rules
for the appointment of peace officers. Reserve Police Officers are appointed
under Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Chapter 341, and are not entitled to civil service
status under Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Chapter 143.
   (E)   Duties. The duties of the Police Reserve, subject at all times to the
direction and supervision of the Chief of Police, shall be to assist the
regular members of the Police Department in the enforcement of law and
maintenance of peace and order, when assigned duty by the Chief of Police. The
Chief of Police may call the Police Reserve into service at any time the Chief
considers it necessary to have additional officers to preserve the peace and
enforce the law. Reserve Police Officers shall act only in a supplementary
capacity to the regular police force. When assigned to duty, members of the
Police Reserve will be under the control and supervision of the regular police
force when carrying out their duties. The chain of command established for the
Police Department shall be strictly adhered to by members of the Police
Reserve.
   (F)   Powers and authority.
      (1)   On approval of the appointment of a member who is a peace officer
as described by Article 2.12, Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure, the Chief of
Police may authorize the person appointed to carry a weapon or act as a peace
officer at all times, regardless of whether the person is engaged in the actual
discharge of official duties.
      (2)   No person appointed to the Cleburne Police Reserve may carry a
weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer until such person has been approved
by the City Council.
   (G)   Identification and uniforms. The Chief of Police shall prescribe the
uniforms and badges for members of the Police Reserve Force and direct the
manner in which the same shall be worn. The badge and identification card
issued to members of the Police Reserve Force by the Police Department shall be
carried at all times by members of the Police Reserve Force.
   (H)   Compensation and benefits. Members of the Police Reserve may be
compensated for the performance of their official duties. Compensation shall be
commensurate with their official duties. The Chief of Police shall have the
authority to establish a rate of pay, if any, for the Police Reserve. The city
may provide hospital and medical assistance to a member of the Police Reserve
who sustains injury in the course of performing official duties in the same
manner as provided for full-time police officers.
   (I)   Termination of membership.
      (1)   Membership of any person in the Police Reserve may be terminated by
the Chief of Police at any time for any cause, and any member may resign from
the Police Reserve at any time, but it shall be the duty of the Reserve Officer
to notify the Chief of such resignation.
      (2)   In addition to the penalties provided by law, any violation of law
under color of the performance of duty as a member of the Police Reserve, and
any breach of the rules and regulations established by the Chief of Police,
shall subject any member of the Police Reserve to summary expulsion and the
fact may be published at the order of the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 05-2013-25, passed 5-14-13; Am. Ord. 01-2014-08, passed 1-28- 14; Am.
Ord. 06-2015-44, passed 6-9-15)
§ 33.04 USE OF POLICE STATION PROPERTY FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITY.
   (A)   The buildings and premises of the Cleburne Police Department at 302
West Henderson Street, is hereby designated as a non-public forum. This is the
building and premises at which official business of the police department is
conducted, including training, administration, and other official department
business.
   (B)   Except as permitted by division (C), it shall be unlawful for a person
to engage in protests, public speeches, marches, sit-ins, or demonstrations
promoting a point of view at the buildings or premises set forth in division
(A).
   (C)   Activity that is unlawful under division (B) is permitted:
      (1)   On adjacent sidewalks and public rights-of-way so long as the
activity is not conducted in the roadway; and
      (2)   Only if the activity does not obstruct vehicle or pedestrian
movement on any street, road, sidewalk or access to or from the building or
premises set forth in division (A).
   (D)   For the purposes of this section, the term DEMONSTRATION is defined as
the dissemination of information by displaying objects, placards, signs,
symbols, or engaging in expressive conduct concerning religious, political or
other views to the extent that such activities are protected by the First
Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article 1, Section 8 of the
Texas Constitution.
   (E)   For the purposes of this section, the term ROADWAY is defined as the
portion of a street or highway designed, improved or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, typically delineated by curbs, edgelines or the edge of the
pavement.
(Ord. 01-2015-05, passed 1-13-15)
CHAPTER 34: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
   
34.01   Affirmative action plans adopted by reference
   
34.02   Personnel rules and regulations adopted by reference
   
34.03   Texas Municipal Retirement System (TMRS)— election to participate;
adoption by reference
   
34.04   Social security
   
34.05   Civil service system for firefighters and police officers — established
   
34.06   Work periods established
§ 34.01 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLANS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   An affirmative action plan with attached supplement, Guide to City
Employment Practices, pertaining to personnel employment practices and an
affirmative action plan for Section 3 of Housing and Urban Development Act of
1968, being 12 USC 1701u, pertaining to business opportunities and employment
in federal financially assisted projects, copies of which are attached hereto
by reference and maintained by the city personnel officer, for all purposes is
officially adopted and approved.
('68 Code, § 2-4) (Res. 3-1976-11B, passed 3-9-76)
§ 34.02 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   “City Personnel Rules and Regulations,” copies of which are attached hereto
by reference and maintained by the City Personnel Director, for all purposes is
hereby officially adopted and approved, and where there exists a conflict
between any of the ordinances contained in this code of ordinances and any of
the “City Personnel Rules and Regulations,” the “City Personnel Rules and
Regulations” shall govern and prevail.
('68 Code, § 2-5) (Ord. 1-1982-4, passed 1-12-81)
§ 34.03 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM (TMRS)— ELECTION TO PARTICIPATE;
ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Election to participate in the TMRS. On behalf of the city, the City
Council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the
employees of all departments, except the fire department, participate in the
Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereafter “TMRS”) as provided in Tex. Gov't
Code §§ 851.001 et seq., as amended; and all of the benefits and obligations of
such system are hereby accepted.
('68 Code, § 2-20) (Ord. passed 9-8-52)
   (B)   Election to participate in the TMRS Supplemental Benefits Fund. The
City Council elects to have the employees of all participating departments of
the city participate in and be covered by the Supplemental Benefits Fund of the
Texas Municipal Retirement System, as provided by Tex. Gov't Code §§ 851.001 et
seq.; and all the benefits and obligations of participation in said fund are
hereby accepted by the city as to such employees.
('68 Code, § 2-28) (Ord. 9-1978-43, passed 9-12-78)
   (C)   Adoption by reference. Ordinances effecting the plan for participation
in the TMRS, employee contributions, updated service credits, increases in
benefits and retirement annuities and any other applicable legislation of the
city and state are adopted by reference into this code of ordinances as if
fully set forth herein and shall be kept on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 34.04 SOCIAL SECURITY.
   (A)   Execution of agreements.
      (1)   The City Council, acting for and on behalf of the city, shall enter
into all necessary agreements with the state department of public welfare for
the purpose of securing federal old age and survivor's insurance benefits for
city employees under applicable state and federal laws.
      (2)   The Mayor is appointed as agent of the City Council and of the city
to execute all necessary agreements and instruments for and in behalf of the
City Council and the city.
('68 Code, § 2-29)
   (B)   Duties of City Clerk. The City Clerk is directed to be the person
responsible for making assessments, collections, payments, and reports, as
required by the state department of public welfare, in connection with the
federal old age and survivor's insurance program for city employees.
('68 Code, § 2-30)
   (C)   Fund established. A sufficient sum of money shall be allocated and set
aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of
applicable state and federal laws relating to the federal old age and
survivor's insurance program, such money so allocated and set aside to be known
as the City Social Security Fund, which fund shall be set aside and maintained
in the regular city depository.
('68 Code, § 2-31) (Ord. passed 12-13-55)
§ 34.05 CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM FOR FIREFIGHTERS AND POLICE OFFICERS —
ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   In accordance with Tex. Loc. Gov't Code §§ 143.001 et seq., which was
adopted by the qualified voters of this city [as originally set forth by state
statute at an election held January 8, 1948], there is established a civil
service system for firefighters and police officers.
('68 Code, § 8-2)
   (B)   Said civil service system shall be administered in accordance with
Tex. Loc. Gov't Code §§ 143.001 et seq.
§ 34.06 WORK PERIODS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The work period for all Non-Civil Service Employees shall be a seven
consecutive day, 40 hour work week. All non-exempt employees shall be
compensated at a rate of one and one-half times the regular rate of pay for all
hours worked in excess of 40 within the work period.
   (B)   The beginning and ending of the seven day work period will be
established by city policy and may be changed, provided the change is intended
to be permanent and not designed to evade overtime compensation.
(Ord. 01-2014-09, passed 1-28-14)
CHAPTER 35: TAXATION AND FINANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Taxes — when due; penalty and interest on delinquent payment
   
35.02   Delinquent tax roll
   
35.03   Delinquent tax file
   
35.04   Tax certificate charges
   
35.05   Occupation tax
   
35.06   Local sales and use tax
   
35.07   Homestead exemption
   
35.08   Homestead exemption for all resident ad valorem taxpayers
   
35.09   Fee on bingo prizes
   
35.10   Returned check charge
   
35.11   Electronic payment processing fee
Statutory reference:
   Taxation generally, see Tex. Tax Code §§ 302.001 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 TAXES — WHEN DUE; PENALTY AND INTEREST ON DELINQUENT PAYMENT.
   (A)   All taxes due the city shall become due and payable on October 1 of
the year for which they are levied and assessed, and shall be paid before
February 1 of the following year.
   (B)   (1)   If any person fails to pay such taxes before February 1, such
taxes shall be delinquent and shall bear interest at the rate of 1% for each
month or portion of a month the tax remains unpaid, and, in addition thereto, a
penalty of 6% of the amount of the tax for the first calendar month it is
delinquent plus 1% for each additional month or portion of a month the tax
remains unpaid prior to July 1 of the year in which it becomes delinquent.
However, a tax delinquent on July 1 incurs a total penalty of 12% of the amount
of the delinquent tax without regard to the number of months the tax has been
delinquent.
      (2)   When any penalty or interest has become due on any taxes for
failure to pay the same when due, such penalty and interest shall not be
permitted but shall be collected.
('68 Code, § 26-1) (Ord. passed 5-11-54; Am. Ord. 7-1975-19, passed 7-8-75; Am.
Ord. 12-1981-45, passed 12-8-81)
§ 35.02 DELINQUENT TAX ROLL.
   (A)   The city tax office shall maintain a delinquent tax roll whereby all
delinquent taxes, after 30 days have passed from the June 1 notice, shall be
entered into the roll, which shall include the property owner's name as of
January 1, a description of the property, the amount owned and the period for
which it is owned.
   (B)   The delinquent tax roll shall be maintained so that, as a tax payment
is made, that particular tax be struck from the roll. There shall be separate
rolls maintained for real and personal taxes. This roll shall constitute the
delinquent tax roll and record of the city in conjunction with the delinquent
tax file provided for in §
35.03.
('68 Code, § 26-2) (Ord. passed 8-22-67)
§ 35.03 DELINQUENT TAX FILE.
   In addition to the delinquent tax roll provided for in §
35.02, there shall be maintained a delinquent tax file, whereby only files that
show a delinquency of at least 30 days from June 1 shall be maintained. When
any of the taxes in such file are paid, the file on the tax paid shall be
withdrawn from the delinquent file and placed in a retired file kept for that
purpose. All taxes not paid before delinquency shall remain in the original
file until paid, so that all taxes that remain in such file shall constitute
the delinquent tax records of the city.
('68 Code, § 26-3) (Ord. passed 8-22-67)
§ 35.04 TAX CERTIFICATE CHARGES.
   Any person desiring a tax certificate from the tax office of the city shall
first pay a $2 charge for each certificate requested.
('68 Code, § 26-4) (Ord. passed 7-11-67; Am. Ord. 9-1974-40, passed 9-10-74;
Am. Ord. 4-1977-12, passed 4-12-77; Am. Ord. 4-1977-13, passed 4-26-77)
Cross-reference:
   Tax status considered for permit to move building, see §
150.099
§ 35.05 OCCUPATION TAX.
   There is levied an annual occupation tax by the city upon every firm,
business, occupation and calling of every kind and character which is subject
to an occupation tax by the laws of the state, equal to one-half of the
occupation tax levied by the state.
('68 Code, § 26-5)
§ 35.06 LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX.
   (A)   The 1% local sales and use tax within the city is established by the
ordinance passed on May 13, 1969, which was adopted by the electorate on June
24, 1969.
(Ord. passed 5-13-69)
   (B)   The .5% local sales and use tax in support of the Cleburne 4B Economic
Development Corporation within the city is established by the ordinance passed
on August 28, 2001, which was adopted by the electorate on August 11, 2001.
(Ord. 8-2001-58, passed 8-28-01)
   (C)   Pursuant to Tex. Tax Code § 321.105, the City Council voted to
continue the tax on the sale, production, distribution, lease or rental of, and
the use, storage or other consumption of gas and electricity for residential
use within the city.
(Ord. 4-1979-19, passed 4-10-79)
   (D)   The ordinances effecting the taxes referenced in this section are on
file in the office of the City Clerk.
('68 Code, § 26-6)
Editor's note: 
   The language in the above section added at the discretion of the editor.
§ 35.07 HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION.
   (A)   Pursuant to the Texas Constitution, Art. VIII, Section 1-b, 10% of the
market value of the residence homestead of a married or unmarried adult,
including one living alone, shall be exempted from ad valorem taxation imposed
by the city.
   (B)   Any person who makes a false affidavit in claiming homestead exemption
shall be subject to all penalties and interest charges which accrue for lack of
payment of taxes, and all other appropriate criminal penalties.
('68 Code, § 26-7) (Res. 3-1974-12, passed 2-19-74; Am. Ord. 9-1978-39, passed
9-12-78; Am. Ord. 01-2004-01, passed 1-13-04)
§ 35.08 HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR ALL RESIDENT AD VALOREM TAXPAYERS.
   A ten percentage of the market value of the residence homestead of a married
or unmarried adult, including one living alone, be exempted from ad valorem
taxation imposed by the city for the tax year 2004 and shall continue in effect
until modified or repealed by the City Council or by law.
('68 Code, § 26-8) (Ord. 9-1982-43, passed 9-14-82; Am. Ord. 01-2004-01, passed
1-13-04)
§ 35.09 FEE ON BINGO PRIZES.
   (A)   The city shall collect a fee from each person who wins a prize in a
bingo game in the amount of 2½% of the amount or value of the prize in
accordance with Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 179d, § 19c.
   (B)   If the city and the county are both entitled to a share of the bingo
prize fee, the city shall collect its pro rata share as determined under Tex.
Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 179d, § 19c(d).
   (C)   The bingo prize fee shall be reported and collected in accordance with
the provisions of Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 179d, § 20.
§ 35.10 RETURNED CHECK CHARGE.
   On return of a payment device to the city following dishonor of the payment
device by a payor, the city, its assignee, agent, or representative, or any
other person retained by the city to seek collection of the face value of the
dishonored payment device may charge the drawer or endorser a fee of $25.
(Ord. 05-2014-45, passed 5-27-14)
§ 35.11 ELECTRONIC PAYMENT PROCESSING FEE.
   A $1.50 per transaction fee will be charged for each credit/debit card
transaction made for payment of any fees or fines paid at Utility Billing or
the Municipal Court made by any method whether via website, in person, over the
phone, mail, fax, or other like method received by the city, its assignee,
agent, or representative, or any other person retained by the city.
(Ord. 09-2017-43, passed 9-12-17)
CHAPTER 36: RECORDS MANAGEMENT
Section
   
36.01   Definitions
   
36.02   City records declared public property
   
36.03   Policy
   
36.04   Designation of Records Management Officer
   
36.05   Duties of Records Management Officer
   
36.06   Establishment of Records Management Committee; duties
   
36.07   Duties and responsibilities of department heads
   
36.08   Development of records management plan
   
36.09   Designation of Records Liaison Officers
   
36.10   Duties and responsibilities of Records Liaison Officers
   
36.11   Records control schedules; approval; filing with state
   
36.12   Implementation and destruction of records under schedule
   
36.13   Destruction of unscheduled records
§ 36.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY RECORDS. All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs,
sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other
information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws
of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or
employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of this chapter or procedures
authorized by it and in no other manner.
   DEPARTMENT HEAD. The officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative
policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records.
   ESSENTIAL RECORD. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or
continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the re-
creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection
and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
   PERMANENT RECORD. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a
records control schedule is given as permanent.
   RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULE. A document prepared by or under the authority of
the Records Management Officer listing the records maintained by the city,
their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the
records management program may require.
   RECORDS LIAISON OFFICERS. The persons designated under §
36.09 of this chapter.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT. The application of management techniques to the
creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records
for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules,
the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of
essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of
inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports,
and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and
other records storage.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE. The committee established in §
36.06 of this chapter.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER. The person designated in §
36.04 of this chapter.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN. The plan developed under §
36.08 of this chapter.
   RETENTION PERIOD. The minimum time that must pass after the creation,
recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions
associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(Ord. 12-1990-30, passed 12-20-90)
§ 36.02 CITY RECORDS DECLARED PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   All city records as defined in §
36.01 of this chapter are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No
city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal
or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or
compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such
records is prohibited.
(Ord. 12-1990-30, passed 12-20-90)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 36.03 POLICY.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient,
economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution,
organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records
from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the
requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act, and accepted records
management practice.
(Ord. 12-1990-30, passed 12-20-90)
§ 36.04 DESIGNATION OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER.
   The City Secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve
as Records Management Officer for the city. As provided by state law, each
successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the Director
and Librarian of the Texas State Library within 30 days of the initial
designation or of taking up the office, as applicable.
(Ord. 12-1990-30, passed 12-20-90)
§ 36.05 DUTIES OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER.
   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, the Records Management
Officer shall:
   (A)   Administer the records management program and provide assistance to
department heads in its implementation.
   (B)   Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems,
standards, and procedures.
   (C)   In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and
establish a disaster plan for each city office and department to ensure maximum
availability of the records in order to re-establish operations quickly and
with minimum disruption and expense.
   (D)   Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the
historically valuable records of the city.
   (E)   Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for record-
keeping supplies.
   (F)   Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform
filing system and a forms design and control system for the city.
   (G)   Provide records management advice and assistance to all city
departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and
by on-site consultation.
   (H)   Monitor records retention schedules and rules issued by the Texas
State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records management
program and the city's records control schedules are in compliance with state
regulations.
   (I)   Disseminate to the city and department heads information concerning
state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records.
   (J)   Instruct Records Liaison Officers and other personnel in policies and
procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records
management program.
   (K)   Direct Records Liaison Officers or other personnel in the conduct of
records inventories in preparation for the development of records control
schedules as required by state law and this chapter.
   (L)   Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, or other disposition of
city records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of
the records management program and the requirements of state law.
   (M)    Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved
records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored
electronically, and the estimated cost of space savings as the result of such
disposal or disposition.
   (N)   Report annually to the city on the implementation of the records
management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the
statistical and fiscal data compiled under division (M) of this section.
   (O)   Bring to the attention of the City Council noncompliance by department
heads or other city personnel with the policies and procedures of the records
management program or the Local Government Records Act.
(Ord. 12-1990-30, passed 12-20-90)
§ 36.06 ESTABLISHMENT OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE; DUTIES.
   (A)   Established. A Records Management Committee consisting of the City
Manager, City Attorney, Director of Finance and Personnel Officer is hereby
established.
   (B)   Duties. The Committee shall:
      (1)   Assist the Records Management Officer in the development of
policies and procedures governing the records management program.
      (2)   Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and
propose changes and improvements if needed.
      (3)   Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the
Records Management Officer.
      (4)   Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance
with approved records control schedules.
      (5)   Actively support and promote the records management program
throughout the city.
(Ord. 12-1990-30, passed 12-20-90)
§ 36.07 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   In addition to the other duties assigned in this chapter, department heads
shall:
   (A)   Cooperate with the Records Management Officer in carrying out the
policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and
economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   Adequately document the transaction of government business and the
services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his or her
staff are responsible.
   (C)   Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their
preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in
accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program
of the city and the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 12-1990-30, passed 12-20-90)
§ 36.08 DEVELOPMENT OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   The Records Management Officer shall develop a records management
plan, which shall be reviewed by the Records Management Committee, for
submission to the City Council. The plan must contain policies and procedures
designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to
adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to properly preserve
those records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be
designed to enable the Records Management Officer to carry out his or her
duties prescribed by state law and this chapter effectively.
   (B)   Once approved by the City Council, the records management plan shall
be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions,
bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city, and records shall
be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with
the plan.
   (C)   State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or
recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department
head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this
chapter and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by
the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records
management program of the city.
(Ord. 12-1990-30, passed 12-20-90)
§ 36.09 DESIGNATION OF RECORDS LIAISON OFFICERS.
   Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve
as Records Liaison Officer, for the implementation of the records management
program in the department. If the Records Management Officer determines that in
the best interests of the records management program more than one Records
Liaison Officers should be designated for a department, the department shall
designate the number of Records Liaison Officers specified by the Records
Management Officer. Persons designated as Records Liaison Officers shall be
thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the
department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by
the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or
removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a Records
Liaison Officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to
fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as Records Liaison Officer for
his or her department.
(Ord. 12-1990-30, passed 12-20-90)
§ 36.10 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF RECORDS LIAISON OFFICERS.
   In addition to the other duties assigned in this chapter, the Records
Liaison Officers shall:
   (A)   Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the
department in preparation for the development of records control schedules.
   (B)   In cooperation with the Records Management Officer, coordinate and
implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in
their department.
   (C)   Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records
management program.
(Ord. 12-1990-30, passed 12-20-90)
§ 36.11 RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES; APPROVAL; FILING WITH STATE.
   (A)   The Records Management Officer, in cooperation with department heads
and Records Liaison Officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a
department by department basis listing all records created or received by the
department and the retention period for each record for submission to the Texas
State Library no later than the deadline set by state law. Records control
schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition
of city records as the records management plan may require.
   (B)   Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed
by the Records Management Officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in
compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it
continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department
and the records management program of the city.
   (C)   Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule
for a department must be approved by the department head and the members of the
Records Management Committee.
   (D)   Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to
and accepted for filing by the Director and Librarian as provided by state law.
If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule will be amended to make
it acceptable for filing. The Records Management Officer shall submit the
records control schedules to the Director and Librarian.
(Ord. 12-1990-30, passed 12-20-90)
§ 36.12 IMPLEMENTATION AND DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS UNDER SCHEDULE.
   (A)   A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and
adopted under §
36.08 of this chapter shall be implemented by department heads and Records
Liaison Officers according to the policies and procedures of the records
management plan.
   (B)   A record whose retention period has expired on a records control
schedule may be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the
record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or
the department head requests in writing to the Records Management Committee
that the record be retained for an additional period.
   (C)   Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control
schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the Records
Management Officer from the Records Management Committee.
(Ord. 12-1990-30, passed 12-20-90)
§ 36.13 DESTRUCTION OF UNSCHEDULED RECORDS.
   A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control
schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same
manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the Records
Management Officer has submitted to and received back from the Director and
Librarian an approved destruction authorization request.
(Ord. 12-1990-30, passed 12-20-90)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      Chapter
         
50.   GARBAGE AND TRASH
         
51.   WATER AND SEWERS
         
52.   MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE UTILITY
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND TRASH
Section
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Garbage to be placed in plastic garbage containers/carts
   
50.03   Garbage to be collected by City Sanitary Department; private collection
for hire prohibited
   
50.04   Collection and disposal of animal manure and decaying matter
   
50.05   Location of plastic carts
   
50.06   Rates for hauling and disposing of garbage
   
50.07   Fee collection for residential and commercial garbage pickup
   
50.08   Periodic inspection by sanitatation superintendent
   
50.09   Brush/bulk collection
   
50.10   Collection — general regulations; yard waste; right to refuse
collection
   
50.11   Hauling garbage to landfill or transfer station; fee schedule; city
cleanup week
 
   
50.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Authority of city to provide for collection and disposal of garbage and
trash, see Charter §
2.7
   Deposit of garbage and trash at Lake Pat Cleburne, see §
98.062
   Health and sanitation, see
Ch. 96
   Special use permits for refuse dumps, see §
155.31
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL CONTAINER SERVICE CUSTOMER. An owner, occupant, tenant or lessee
using or occupying any building or structure which is neither “Residential”
“Minor Commercial,” nor “Intermediate Commercial” as defined in this section.
   DRY GARBAGE. Refuse, trash, rubbish such as feathers, coffee grounds, tin
cans, paper boxes, glass, ashes, cinders, rocks, old clothes, shoes, broken
dishes and utensils, old iron, tin, zinc and all kinds of junk and useless
material including bundled tree trimmings, cuttings and shrubs, and excluding
grass clippings.
   INTERMEDIATE COMMERCIAL SERVICE.  Any owner, occupant, tenant or lessee
using or occupying any building or structure as a place of business that
generates more than one and less than two carts not exceeding 96 gallon in
size.
   MINOR COMMERCIAL CUSTOMER.  Any owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using and
occupying any building or structure as a place of business which generates one
or less carts not exceeding 96 gallon in size.
   RESIDENTIAL PICKUP CUSTOMER. Any owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using and
occupying any residence, building, house, structure or single-family residence
or multi-family dwelling unit up to and including four units, including trailer
parks and hotels or motels consisting of no more than four units. Charges shall
be based upon the minimum monthly residential charge multiplied by the number
of dwelling units in the structure.
   WET GARBAGE. All animal or vegetable matter such as waste materials from
kitchens, grocery stores, butcher shops, restaurants, cafes, hotels, rooming
and boarding houses, such as scraps of meat, bread, bones, peelings of fruit
and vegetables.
('68 Code, § 14-1) (Ord. 1-1987-02, passed 1-13-87; Am. Ord. 5-1993-15, passed
5-11-93; Am. Ord. 9-1993-33, passed 9-14-93; Am. Ord. 1-1994-02, passed 1-11-
94; Am. Ord. 12-2011-69, passed 12-13-11)
§ 50.02 GARBAGE TO BE PLACED IN PLASTIC GARBAGE CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Each owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using and occupying any
residence, building, house or structure within the corporate limits of the
city, who has a place of abode, is required to keep and maintain at all times
in a convenient location not visible from the street (when accommodations are
available) adequate number of carts for accumulation of garbage. The city shall
furnish one roll out cart for garbage collection. A second additional cart may
be obtained by paying a onetime non-refundable fee. Any carts obtained beyond
two will incur an additional monthly fee.
   (B)   All garbage shall be placed in plastic bags of sufficient number to
adequately hold all garbage being disposed of from such home or dwelling before
being placed in cart.
('68 Code, § 14-2) (Ord. 1-1987-02, passed 1-13-87 ; Am. Ord. 12-2011-69,
passed 12-13-11 )
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.03 GARBAGE TO BE COLLECTED BY CITY SANITARY DEPARTMENT; PRIVATE COLLECTION
FOR HIRE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Garbage collection service is provided by the city and may use at its
discretion a manual or semi-automated collection system in areas where
automated collection vehicles cannot safely or efficiently operate. It shall be
mandatory for all occupants, persons in possession, charge, or control of
places or premises in the city in or from which garbage is created, accumulated
or produced, to exclusively use the city garbage collection service; provided,
however, that there may be joint or multiple use of garbage containers with
approval from the City Sanitation Department. The City Sanitation Department or
its designated authorized representatives shall make periodic garbage pick-ups
throughout the city utilizing plastic garbage carts that are provided or
approved by the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, other than
the authorized representatives or sanitation employees of the city, to collect,
remove, or dispose of garbage in the city or to rent or lease garbage
containers to any individual or firm located in the city; provided, however,
that the provision of this section prohibiting private garbage hauling shall
not apply to those persons or firms whose job or occupation incidentally
include the occasional removal of garbage or debris from a location in the
city. This exception shall pertain to persons or firms employed at such jobs as
house cleaning, yard work, or premises clean-up; however, such persons or firms
must dispose of any collected garbage at the city landfill or city incinerator
upon payment of the established fee.
   (C)   Carts shall be provided by the city and issued to an address. Carts
shall not be removed from that premises. (Only approved carts will be
serviced). The carts shall be the property of the city and must not be painted,
marked, abused, mutilated, altered or modified in any way. Abuse and damage to
a cart by a customer shall result in an assessment equal to the replacement
cost of cart and /or time and materials involved in repair of cart. Examples of
abuse include but are not limited to over loading the cart beyond the rated
weight capacity; fire damage caused by hot coals and or ashes; painting or
marking the cart in any manner or failing to follow the proper care and use
instructions for the cart.
('68 Code, § 14-3) (Ord. 1-1987-02, passed 1-13-87; Am. Ord. 9-1987-51, passed
9-8-87 ; Am. Ord. 12-2011-69, passed 12-13-11 )
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.04 COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF ANIMAL MANURE AND DECAYING MATTER. 
   Manure from private stables or offal or refuse from animals or “night soil”
and dead animals and all other waste not herein mentioned must be kept in a
separate suitable receptacle and not dumped in the alleys or retained on the
premises so as to become a nuisance and the same is to be disposed of by the
owner thereof. It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of the Sanitation
Department to see that such refuse is properly disposed of by the owner thereof
when so ordered. The refuse shall be hauled away from the premises of the owner
thereof at his own expense and by his own means and such refuse shall not be
considered garbage and shall not be picked up by the garbage trucks of the City
Sanitation Department.
('68 Code, § 14-4) (Ord. 1-1987-02, passed 1-13-87)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.05 LOCATION OF PLASTIC CARTS.
   (A)   The owner, occupant, tenant or lessees of the premises shall place the
cart in front of such premises with lids closed on day of collection no later
than 7:00 a.m. within three feet of any obstacle and within three feet of curb,
with the wheels toward the residence on the date of garbage collection.
   (B)   Carts shall be removed from its designated point of collection and
returned to a location not visible from the street if accommodations are
available no later than 8:00 p.m. the day pick up is made.
   (C)   A lost/stolen or cart in need of repair shall be reported to the
sanitation department.
   (D)   A resident who for health reasons cannot physically place the cart at
the required location and lives alone or has no one residing with them that can
physically place the cart are eligible for carry out service. A statement from
a physician and a site visit will be required. The cart for carry out service
shall be placed in front of the home visible from the street. Carts shall not
be placed in a fenced area or garage.
   (E)   Commercial garbage containers shall be located as approved by
Sanitation Superintendent. Containers shall also be located within a three
sided enclosure constructed of wood or masonry. Size of the enclosure shall be
a minimum six feet tall by ten feet wide by 12 feet long. The owner shall also
provide a concrete pad to set the container. All costs to locate the container
shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(‘68 Code, § 14-5) (Ord. 1-1987-02, passed 1-13-87; Am. Ord. 12- 2011-69,
passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 12-2017-75, passed 12-12-17) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.06 RATES FOR HAULING AND DISPOSING OF GARBAGE.
   (A)   The monthly charge for the gathering and removal of all garbage, trash
and rubbish, excluding grass clippings, for residential, minor commercial and
intermediate commercial service, within the corporate limits of the city, shall
be as follows:
      (1)   Residential service, curbside pickup   $16.80
      (2)   Minor commercial curbside pickup   $16.80
      (3)   Intermediate commercial pickup      $33.96
      (4)   Second trash cart            (onetime non-refundable fee and no
additional monthly fee)
      (5)   Third and any additional         $5.00 each
      (6)   Additional bulk/brush each pickup      $30.00
      (7)   Commercial container service.
         (a)   1.   Container service.
Pickups per Week Container Size (yards) Monthly Charge
Pickups per Week Container Size (yards) Monthly Charge
1                2                      $ 115.01
1                4                      167.42
1                6                      224.17
1                8                      271.20
2                2                      190.80
2                4                      306.82
2                6                      365.49
2                8                      441.89
3                2                      266.26
3                4                      384.26
3                6                      506.94
3                8                      602.42
4                2                      342.05
4                4                      494.00
4                6                      650.74
4                8                      777.83
5                2                      417.81
5                4                      601.17
5                6                      790.12
5                8                      946.12
6                2                      491.37
6                4                      712.17
6                6                      953.79
6                8                      1,182.22
                                       
 
            2.   Extra Pickups.
 
Container Size (yards) Charge for Each Extra Pickup
2                      $ 51.30
4                      70.11
6                      91.42
8                      115.79
 
         (b)   Roll-off service.
            Initial set fee (any size container)      $ 174.31
            Daily rental fee (any size container)   6.18
            20 cubic yard container (per load)      356.38
            30 cubic yard container (per load)      480.31
            40 cubic yard container (per load)      599.10
            30 cubic yard compactor (per load)   623.64
            40 cubic yard compactor (per load)   778.59
   (B)   The Superintendent of the Sanitation Department is authorized and
directed to fix the monthly fee for the garbage and trash pickup for commercial
businesses within 30 days from the effective date of this chapter based upon
the amount of garbage and trash being hauled or picked up from each such place
of business in the city. Such fees shall be fixed within the minimum and
maximum rates of fees set forth therein. These fees when so fixed shall be the
fees to be charged thereafter to each such place of business subject to
approval by the City Manager. The Superintendent of the Sanitation Department
shall, upon fixing such fees, immediately notify the owner or manager of each
place of business of the fee amount being fixed against each such place of
business as a monthly charge for garbage pickup.
   (C)   (1)   In the event the owner or manager of any such place of business
should be dissatisfied with the fees so fixed by the Superintendent of the
Sanitation Department as a monthly garbage pickup fee against his place of
business, such owner or manager shall have the right to appeal to the City
Manager within 30 days from the date such owner or manager received notice from
the Superintendent of the Sanitation Department of the fixing of his garbage
pickup fees. Such appeal shall be in writing and the City Manager shall
investigate the appeal and attempt to make a satisfactory adjustment with the
person so appealing.
      (2)   The City Manager shall notify the person so appealing of his
decision and in the event such person is dissatisfied with the decision of the
City Manager, he shall have the right to appeal from the decision of the City
Manager to the City Council, in writing, within 30 days from the date of the
decision of the City Manager. In such case, the last-mentioned appeal shall be
heard by the Council at its next regular meeting. The Council may sustain the
fees as fixed by the City Manager or may raise or lower such fees as fixed by
the City Manager or may raise or lower such fees based upon the amount of
garbage generated by such business and the decision of the Council shall be
final.
   (D)   In the event there should be a change in the nature of business being
conducted in any place of business where garbage fees have already been
established by the Superintendent of the Sanitation Department, and this change
results in a change in the amount of garbage being picked up each month by the
Sanitation Department, the Superintendent of the Sanitation Department shall
have the right and power to adjust the garbage pickup fees of such place of
business by increasing or decreasing such fees as required by the change in
such business and the amount of garbage generated therefrom, all in accordance
with the provisions set forth above regulating the original fixing of garbage
fees. The owner or manager of such place of business shall have the same right
of appeal as set forth above with reference to the appeal allowed regarding the
original fixing of garbage pickup fees by the Superintendent of the Sanitation
Department.
(‘68 Code, § 14-6) (Ord. 1-1987-02, passed 1-13-87; Am. Ord. 9-1992-19, passed
9-8-92; Am. Ord. 5-1993-15, passed 5-11-93; Am. Ord. 9-1993-33, passed 9-14-93;
Am. Ord. 1-1994-02, passed 1-11-94; Am. Ord. 9-1994-44, passed 9-13-94; Am.
Ord. 9-1995-26, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 9-1996-69, passed 9-24-96; Am. Ord. 9-
1997-69, passed 9-9-97; Am. Ord. 9-1998-53, passed 9-8-98; Am. Ord. 9-1999-87,
passed 9-14-99; Am. Ord. 9-2000-42, passed 9-12-00; Am. Ord. 9-2001-65, passed
9-25-01; Am. Ord. 12-2011-69, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 08-2014-70, passed 8-
12-14; Am. Ord. 09-2014-74, passed 9-9-14; Am. Ord. 12-2017-75, passed 12-12-
17; Am. Ord. 09-2019-57, passed 9- 24-19; Am. Ord. 09-2020-47, passed 9-8-20;
Am. Ord. 09-2021-53, passed 9-28-21; Am. Ord. 08-2022-63, passed 8-23-22; Am.
Ord. 08-2023-54, passed 8-22-23; Am. Ord. 08-2025-25, passed 8-12-25)
§ 50.07 FEE COLLECTION FOR RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL GARBAGE PICKUP.
   (A)   The residential and commercial charges fixed herein for the removal
and disposal of garbage, trash or rubbish, excluding grass clippings, shall be
entered on each customer's water and sewer bill by the city and the amount so
fixed and charged shall be collected monthly in connection with and as a part
of the water and sewer bills of the city. It is further provided that should
any person or persons, owner, occupant, or lessee of any place of abode or of
any place of business fail or refuse to pay the charges for garbage pickup
fixed against him or his place of business when due the city, the City Water
Department shall be authorized to cut off and terminate the water and sewer
services to his place of abode or place of business. In addition thereto, the
city shall be authorized to discontinue garbage pickup services until any
outstanding pickup fees have been paid in full.
   (B)   In the event that the city does not provide water and sewer service to
property owners within the city limits but the city does provide garbage pickup
service to such property owners, and in those cases in which a number of
buildings or structures within the city limits are leased by one common owner
or landlord to several different tenants or lessees, and the landlord pays
water and sewer service fees for each individual structure or leased premises
owned by such landowner, then in such cases each tenant, lessee, occupant or
property owner responsible for payment of garbage pickup fees will be required
to put up a deposit equal to one month's garbage service fee in order to
initiate garbage pickup service to the premises. Should any such tenant or
occupant of a leased premises or any property owner receiving garbage pickup
services within the city limits fail or refuse to pay the charges herein
specified on the date the same shall become due and payable, such occupant
shall have his garbage service suspended, the deposit posted for such unit
shall be forfeited and applied against any outstanding garbage bill assessed
against such occupant; in addition thereto, the Environmental Health Officer
shall be notified immediately of cases of terminated service for appropriate
action in accordance with the health and sanitation regulations set forth in
Chapter 96 of this code and any other applicable ordinance of the city. The
deposit herein required shall be refunded to the customer upon termination of
service and the payment of all services charges then due and owing. All
security deposits are to be held by the city and shall not bear interest while
in the city's possession.
   (C)   All trash carts shall remain the property of the city and shall be
surrendered upon termination of service. Any account unable to furnish cart
upon termination shall be billed for the replacement cost of said cart.
('68 Code, § 14-7) (Ord. 1-1987-02, passed 1-13-87; Am. Ord. 5-1993-15, passed
5-11-93 ; Am. Ord. 12-2011-69, passed 12-13-11 )
Cross-reference:
   Water and sewer billing, payment, see §§
51.015 et seq.
§ 50.08 PERIODIC INSPECTION BY SANITATATION SUPERINTENDENT.
   It is made the duty of the Sanitation Superintendent or a designated
representative to make regular inspection trips at stated intervals of two
weeks apart to determine whether such garbage is being properly disposed of and
to further determine if receptacles of the kind required by this chapter have
been obtained by the persons required to use the same under this chapter and it
is hereby made the duty of such inspector to file a complaint against any
person violating any provision of this chapter in order that such person may be
prosecuted in the City Court.
(‘68 Code, § 14-8) (Ord. 1-1987-02, passed 1-13-87; Am. Ord. 12-2011-69, passed
12-13-11; Am. Ord. 08-2014-70, passed 8-12-14) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.09 BRUSH/BULK COLLECTION.
   (A)   The city shall provide each owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using
and occupying any residence, building, house or structure within the corporate
limits of the city, brush and bulk collection of up to ten cubic yards once per
month at no cost. This service is subject to the exclusions found in division
(C). No construction debris will be collected. Any additional collections can
be scheduled by purchasing an out of cycle collection tag and placing it on the
bulk items.
   (B)   All brush, shrubs, tree trimmings and cuttings shall be no more than
ten feet in length and placed within three feet of the street and six feet from
any obstacle on or before the owner’s scheduled collection.
   (C)   Brush collection is limited to residential and non-profit
organizations. Professional/commercial tree trimmers must dispose of their
brush waste at the city’s transfer station.
   (D)   Bulk and/or brush waste may only be set out between the times of 5:00
p.m. Friday the week before and 7:00 a.m. Monday the week of the owner’s
scheduled bulk waste collection.
   (E)   An owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using and occupying any residence
is subject to an additional bulk/brush charge for collection of any bulk waste
that is placed for collection during a time other than that property’s
collection period defined in division (D), during the owner’s regularly
scheduled bulk waste collection week. Such charge shall be assessed on the
property’s water bill pursuant to the fee schedule adopted by the City Council
(§ 50.06(A)(6)). Nothing herein shall prevent the city from also issuing a
citation for a violation described herein.
   (F)   An owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using and occupying any residence
is subject to an additional bulk/brush fee of $30, as stated in § 50.06(A)(6),
for collection of any bulk waste that is placed for collection during a time
other than that property’s specified collection period.
(Ord. 12-2011-69, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 08-2014-70, passed 8-12-14; Am.
Ord. 08-2018-59, passed 8-14-18)
§ 50.10 COLLECTION — GENERAL REGULATIONS; YARD WASTE; RIGHT TO REFUSE
COLLECTION.
   (A)   No rocks, dirt, hot ashes/coals, hazardous substances or construction
debris shall be placed in carts.
   (B)   Any garbage or waste not placed in the cart provided will not be
collected by the sanitation department and shall remain the responsibility of
the customer/generator for disposal. (With exceptions of the Christmas and
Thanksgiving city observed holiday.)
   (C)   The City Sanitation Department shall have the right to refuse to pick
up garbage on any property where dogs are loose in the yard.
   (D)   The City Sanitation Department shall have the right to refuse to pick
up the following items: lawn chairs, barbecue pits, barbed or bailing wire,
barrels, metal, tires, bicycle frames, appliance frames, vacuum cleaners,
mattress or cushion springs, hazardous liquid cans, cushioned chairs, partially
full paint cans or sealed paint cans, bundles of wood or brush tied with wire,
propane cans or bottles, shock absorbers, large appliances, oil, and dirt or
rocks.
   (E)   No dead fowl, manure, chicken or rabbit droppings, human excretion, or
dead animals shall be placed in carts. The same shall be placed in separate
refuse receptacles and disposed of by the owner at his own expense in
accordance with the foregoing provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally
utilize some other person, firm or corporation’s assigned garbage receptacle
for disposing of garbage, without the consent of the assigned occupant of the
same.
   (G)   No leaves or grass clippings will be collected at the curb by the city
sanitation department. Leaves and grass clippings not used for composting may
be taken to the transfer station shredding site free of charge.
   (H)   Missed pick up due to holiday will be rescheduled to the next
collection day.
      EXAMPLE:   If Holiday is on Monday…
                  Monday regular service will be collected on Tuesday
                  Tuesday regular service will be collected on Wednesday
                  Wednesday regular service will be collected on Thursday
                  Thursday regular service will be collected on Friday
(‘68 Code, § 14-10) (Ord. 1-1987-02, passed 1-13-87; Am. Ord. 5-1993-15, passed
5-11-93; Am. Ord. 12-2011-69, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 08-2014-70, passed 8-
12-14) Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.11 HAULING GARBAGE TO LANDFILL OR TRANSFER STATION; FEE SCHEDULE; CITY
CLEANUP WEEK.
   (A)   (1)   Fees and regulations. Should any person haul all or any part of
his garbage to the City Sanitary Landfill or Transfer Station, he shall
nevertheless be required to pay garbage fees according to the schedule set
forth herein, and is required to dump his garbage at the Transfer Station or
landfill according to the rules and regulations of the Sanitation Department
and shall dump his garbage at the site and the area designated within such site
by the Sanitation Department or those working under its direction and shall
comply in every way with all rules and regulations of the Sanitation Department
with respect to the City Landfill or Transfer Station.
      (2)   City Cleanup Week. The City Manager is authorized to declare up to
a maximum of 12 days per calendar year as City Cleanup Week. During such period
or periods so designated by the City Manager, all or part of any fees for
hauling garbage to the Transfer Station or landfill may be waived by authority
of the City Manager.
   (B)   The Sanitation Department is authorized to collect fees according to
the following scale:
      (1)   Free dumping. Upon submission of the most recent paid utility bill
(water/sewer or garbage), a resident of the city may dump one time each month
for no charge. The free dumps will be limited in size to the amount hauled
within a standard size vehicle. Trailers may be utilized by residents to
transport materials. This does not apply to tires, construction debris,
residential waste that is collected by commercial haulers, or residents that
are performing commercial operations.
      (2)   Shredding site. Anyone wishing to dispose of grass clippings or
other yard waste may deliver these materials to the shredding site located at
the Transfer Station at no charge. Individuals who wish to pick up mulch may do
so at the same site at no charge on Fridays and Saturdays.
      (3)   Fees for disposal at the transfer station.
         (a)   Non-weighed dumps. Limited to the amount of materials hauled
within a standard size vehicle.
            1.   City residents. Free with submission of the most recent paid
utility bill or $15.00 without proof of utility bill.
            2.   Non-residents   $20.00
         (b)   Weighed dumps. Any volume that exceeds the amount of materials
hauled within a standard size vehicle.
            1.   Businesses located within the corporate city
               limits of Cleburne.            $46.62 per ton
            2.   Non-residents and businesses not located within
               the corporate city limits of Cleburne   $70.83 per ton
            3.   The weighed dump rates include a rate for the costs assessed
by the franchisee for waste hauling and disposal, known as the haul rate.
Adjustments to the haul rate, per the terms of the agreement with the service
provider, shall be passed through to the customers of the City of Cleburne's
transfer station and any percentage change in the haul rate shall be applied to
the per ton rate in §
50.11(B)(3)(b)2.
         (c)   Any civic group that brings waste to the transfer station as a
result of roadside cleaning activities, including the Department of
Transportation, or other groups performing public service cleanup activities as
authorized by the City Manager or the Sanitation Superintendent, shall be
exempt from the payment of fees for disposal of garbage or other waste.
         (d)   Unsecured or untarped loads are subject to a $5.00 fee to cover
cleanup of any items that may have been lost during transport.
         (e)   Proof of residency to receive the city resident rate shall be
the most recent, paid city utility bill for water, sewer, refuse, and/or
drainage utility charges. Any persons unable to provide proof of residency
shall be charged the non-residency rate.
         (f)   Tire disposal fee for both residents and non- residents:
            1.   Standard passenger tire       $3.00 each
            2.   Semi-truck tire         $15.00 each
            3.   Tractor tire            $40.00 each
(‘68 Code, § 14-11) (Ord. 1-1987-02, passed 1-13-87; Am. Ord. 9-1992-19, passed
9-8-92; Am. Ord. 5-1993-15, passed 5-11-93; Am. Ord. 9-1996-69, passed 9-24-96;
Am. Ord. 9-1998-53, passed 9-8-98; Am. Ord. 9-1999-87, passed 9-14-99; Am. Ord.
9-2000-42, passed 9-12-00; Am. Ord. 12-2011-69, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 08-
2014-70, passed 8-12-14; Am. Ord. 10-2016-51, passed 10-25-16; Am. Ord. 12-
2017-75, passed 12-12-17; Am. Ord. 03-2022-30, passed 3-22-22; Am. Ord. 11-
2022-80, passed 11-8-22; Am. Ord. 08-2025-25, passed 8-12-25)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or persons, firm or corporation who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $2,000 for each
offense and each violation thereof shall be deemed a separate offense and each
day's continuance or failure to comply here with shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense for each of such days and shall be punishable as such. All
prior ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent with those herein stated are
hereby repealed.
('68 Code, § 14-12) (Ord. 1-1987-02, passed 1-13-87; Am. Ord. 7-1991-21, passed
7-25-91; Am. Ord. 12-2011-69, passed 12-13-11)
CHAPTER 51: WATER AND SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   City to install house service lines; tapping fees; maintenance of
service lines
   
51.002   Water connections to be made by city
   
51.003   Water conservation and drought contingency
   
51.004   Water wells
Rates, Charges and Collections
   
51.015   Application for service, transfer or final; contents of application
   
51.016   New application for premises with delinquent charges
   
51.017   Security deposits; exemptions
   
51.018   Use of security deposits
   
51.019   Security deposit refunds
   
51.020   Security deposit amounts
   
51.021   Payments of fees; delinquency; discontinuance or refusal of service;
notice of discontinuance
   
51.022   (Reserved)
   
51.023   Meters — required; read monthly; charge; water leakage
   
51.024   Meters — exposing to damage; notice of work affecting systems; moving
   
51.025   Revenue collection regulations
   
51.026   Joint owners or users; liability; transfer of accounts
   
51.027   Water lien procedure
   
51.028   Notice of water lien
   
51.029   Using another person's water; use before filing application for
service
   
51.030   Rates for treated water service
   
51.031   Rates for wastewater service
   
51.032   Charges for use of fire hydrants
   
51.033   Industrial waste charge rate formula
   
51.034   Miscellaneous charges and provisions; rates where no charge specified
   
51.035   Fire hydrants
   
51.036   No free water
   
51.037   Tampering with or damaging systems; unlawful use of water; prima facie
evidence
   
51.038   (Reserved)
   
51.039   City released from liability if customer cannot be present when water
service is initiated
   
51.040   Interruption of service by Water Utilities Department; liability
   
51.041   Establishment and funding of Water/Wastewater Rate Mitigation and
Capital Improvement Reserve
   
51.042   Expenditures from the Water/Wastewater Rate Mitigation Reserve;
prohibited expenditures
Extension of Mains
   
51.050   Purpose; where front foot rule inequitable; no vested rights
   
51.051   Pro rata charge
   
51.052   Water and sewer connection charges
   
51.053   Extension of water and sewer lines
   
51.054   Connection with water mains to be made by waterworks department
   
51.055   Contract between city and property owner; no refunds after expiration
of twenty-year period
   
51.056   Application forms; binding upon either party
   
51.057   Deposit for cost of extensions or pro rata charges; city not liable
for payment of interest
   
51.058   Lack of funds
   
51.059   Charges to be credited to water sewer system fund
Industrial Wastes
   
51.070   Purpose and policy
   
51.071   Administration
   
51.072   Definitions; abbreviations
   
51.073   General sewer requirements
   
51.074   Pretreatment of wastewater
   
51.075   Wastewater discharge permit eligibility
   
51.076   Wastewater discharge permit issuance process
   
51.077   Reporting requirements
   
51.078   Compliance monitoring
   
51.079   Confidential information
   
51.080   Publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance
   
51.081   Administrative enforcement remedies
   
51.082   Judicial enforcement remedies
   
51.083   Supplemental enforcement action
   
51.084   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations
   
51.085   Surcharge costs
   
51.086   Pretreatment charges and fees
Waste Haulers
   
51.100   Definitions
   
51.101   Permit required
   
51.102   Fee; display of permit
   
51.103   Responsibilities of liquid waste transporter
   
51.104   Accumulation of liquid waste and disposal
   
51.105   Disposal of liquid waste
   
51.106   Responsibilities of POTW
   
51.107   Denial, suspension, and revocation of permit
   
51.108   Appeal
On-Site Sewage Facilities
   
51.120   Adopting provisions of Texas Health and Safety Code
   
51.121   Area of jurisdiction
   
51.122   On-site sewage facility rules; compliance
   
51.123   Design criteria for on-site sewage facilities; incorporation by
reference
   
51.124   Development or organized disposal systems
   
51.125   Enforcement authority; duties and powers
   
51.126   License to operate
   
51.127   Appeals
   
51.128   Inspections to assure compliance
   
51.129   Emergency repair
   
51.130   Relinquishment of ordinance
 
   
51.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Approcval of industrial solid waste management in municipal solid waste
facility, see Tex. Health and Safety Code § 361.019.
   Water systems in home rule municipalities, see Tex. Loc. Gov't Code §
402.017.
Cross-reference:
   Buildings and general building regulations, see
Ch. 150
   Lake Pat Cleburne, see §§
98.045 et seq.
   Plumbing code, see §§
150.040 et seq.
   Water and sewer requirements for subdivisions, see §§
154.100 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 CITY TO INSTALL HOUSE SERVICE LINES; TAPPING FEES; MAINTENANCE OF
SERVICE LINES.
   [Section deleted by Ord. 07-1996-41]
('68 Code, § 29-1) (Ord. passed 2-13-68; Am. Ord. 07-1996-41, passed 7-23-96)
§ 51.002 WATER CONNECTIONS TO BE MADE BY CITY.
   All connections with city water mains shall be made by the water and sewer
department.
('68 Code, § 29-2) (Ord. passed 2-13-68)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.003 WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY.
   (A)   Adoption by reference. The 2024 Drought Contingency and Emergency
Water Management Plan and the 2024 Water Conservation Plan is adopted and made
part of this chapter to the same extent as copied at length herein as part of
the city water conservation effort planning.
   (B)   Requirements. There is adopted for the purpose of establishing rules
and regulations for the conservation of water and management of water resources
during time of drought, a Cleburne Conservation and Drought Contingency Plan, a
copy of which has been and is now filed with the City Secretary’s Office and
the same is duly adopted and incorporated by reference which under Tex. Admin.
Code, Title 30, Chapter 288, the Water Conservation and Drought Contingency
Plan is required to be updated every five years. Requirements for conservation
measures, identification of levels of drought conditions and drought
contingency measures have been established. The City Manager is the designated
official responsible for the implementation and enforcement of the Cleburne
Water Conservation and Drought Contingency Plan.
   (C)   Penalty for violation. Any person or persons, firm or corporation who
violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than
$2,000 for each offense and each violation thereof shall be deemed a separate
offense and each day’s continuance or failure to comply herewith shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense for each of such days and shall be
punishable as such. All prior ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent with
those herein stated are hereby repealed.
(Ord. 8-1999-74, passed 8-24-99; Am. Ord. 02-2006-17, passed 2-28-06; Am. Ord.
04-2014-31, passed 4-22-14; Am. Ord. 04-2019-19, passed 4-9-19; Am. Ord. 04-
2024-22, passed 4-9-24)
§ 51.004 WATER WELLS.
   (A)   WATER WELL means any hole or holes, bore or bores, to any sand
horizon, formation strata or depth for the purpose of producing water for any
use.
   (B)   Drilling of water wells will not be allowed within the city limits
except water wells owned, operated and maintained by the city with the
following exception:
      (1)   Adequate public water supply, as determined by the Water Utilities
Superintendent, does not exist within 660 feet (1/8 mile) of the property line
or cannot be made available in a reasonable time. If such is the case, the
person(s) desiring to drill a water well may apply to the City Council for
permission to drill the well. The City Council shall hold a hearing on such
application and shall obtain a recommendation from a competent water engineer
familiar with water strata in the county. The cost of such investigation and
report shall be paid for by the person(s) making such application.
      (2)   After such hearing and necessary investigation by the City Council,
if it appears that a necessity exists and that if such applicant is not
permitted to drill such water well, unreasonable hardship will be brought upon
the applicant and that the drilling of such well will not now or in the
immediate future in any way affect, diminish, or interfere with the city's
water supply, then the City Council may grant such applicant a permit to drill
such water well.
      (3)   A person commits an offense if the person causes, allows, or
permits the drilling, digging, boring, driving, or use of any new private water
well within the city on a tract or lot where adequate public water is
available, as determined by the Water Utilities Superintendent, within 660 feet
(1/8 mile) of the property line.
      (4)   Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this
section shall be fined not more than $2,000. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 4-2002-23, passed 4-9-02)
RATES, CHARGES AND COLLECTIONS
§ 51.015 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE, TRANSFER OR FINAL; CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application required.  A person shall not use a service without first
making the proper application for the service with the Water Utilities
Department. For general service accounts, a written application will be
required of those persons desiring service. The application must be made on
forms provided by the Water Utilities Department. The Utility Manager is
authorized to establish other procedures, not in conflict with this chapter or
state law, to process and accept customer applications and to collect and
process security deposits as necessary to secure customer accounts.
   (B)   Restriction of application.  The person making the application shall
include that person's spouse, if any, as an applicant on the application. If
unmarried or unrelated individuals or unrelated business entities who jointly
own or occupy premises desire service, the Utility Manager may require
application to be made jointly in the names of those individuals or business
entities. The Utility Manager may also require application for service to be
made only by and in the name of the owner of property if the Utility Manager
determines that substantial risk of financial loss to the Utility Department
would occur as a result of acceptance of an application for a person other than
the owner. Only adults over the age of 17 years of age or those persons 17
years of age and under who are or have been married shall be allowed to make
application for utility service.
   (C)   Contract. The application constitutes a contract to pay all charges
for service and to abide by all provisions of this chapter, the provisions of
this code, and other local, state and federal laws relating to the service.
   (D)   Accurate information. An applicant shall furnish the names and
addresses of any other joint owners, regardless of whether or not they reside
at the premises, if this information if known to the applicant. An applicant
shall also furnish proper identification and shall correctly furnish any other
relevant information, including but not limited to proof of ownership or
agency, required by the Utility Department in order to properly provide the
service. If information is not furnished or is false, the application may be
denied and service, where provided, may be discontinued. A person commits an
offense if he knowingly makes a false statement on an application for service
under this chapter.
   (E)   Use without application. A person who occupies premises and uses
service without making application is responsible for all water used from the
date of the last meter reading previous to that person occupying the premises.
If the person is a tenant and the owner of the premises failed to give notice
required by this chapter, then the owner is jointly and severally liable with
the tenant for the charges.
   (F)   Outstanding balance of applicant. If any person, firm or corporation
applies to the city for service and it is determined by the Utility Department
that such person, firm or corporation is indebted to the city on any previous
utility account, such service shall not be connected, or if discovered later,
shall be disconnected until full payment, plus any charges, is received by the
Utility Department.
   (G)   Transfer accounts.
      (1)   For all customers requesting a transfer of service from one place
to another within the city, such request may be made by telephone. Person
requesting transfer will be required to identify the correct utility account by
giving the following information:
         (a)   Account Number.
         (b)   Customer Name.
         (c)   Service Address.
      (2)   A transfer fee shall be charged in accordance with §
51.034(A).
   (H)   Final accounts. For all customers requesting to terminate their
utility service, such request may be made by telephone. Persons requesting
termination of service will be required to identify the correct utility account
by giving the following information:
      (1)   Account Number.
      (2)   Customer Name.
      (3)   Service Address.
   (I)   Meters for multi-unit service. Any structure having multi-unit design,
whether multiple dwelling units or multiple business units, shall be required
to provide a separate water main tap and meter for each unit if the tenant is
responsible for the utility bill. If the entire water service to the structure
is paid by the owner or landlord, then only one water main tap and meter shall
be required.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.016 NEW APPLICATION FOR PREMISES WITH DELINQUENT CHARGES.
   Where service has been disconnected, refused or posted for discontinuance at
a premises due to nonpayment of delinquent charges or a violation of this
chapter, a new application will not be accepted from another person to resume
service in the same place under another name so long as the previous customer
continues to occupy or own the premises as his residence or place of business
until:
   (A)   All delinquent charges are paid;
   (B)   Arrangements for payment satisfactory to the Utility Manager are made;
or
   (C)   The violation is abated.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.017 SECURITY DEPOSITS; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Form of Security. Unless exempted under division (D) or (E) of this
section, when a customer applies for service, he must also submit a security
deposit in one of the following forms:
      (1)   Cash;
      (2)   Personal check;
      (3)   Cashier's check or money order.
   (B)   Amount. The amount of security deposit shall be in accordance with §
51.020.
   (C)   Failure to provide security. The Utility Manager may refuse or
discontinue service if a person fails to make a required security deposit.
   (D)   Exemptions from security deposit requirements. Any of the following
persons are not required to post a security deposit, provided he has a
satisfactory credit history with the Utility Department. A SATISFACTORY CREDIT
HISTORY is defined as not having had an order for service termination within
the last 12-month period for failure to pay a utility bill.
      (1)   A person seeking single-family residential service who presents
proof that he is 65 years of age or older; or
      (2)   A residential customer already having one deposit, in his name, at
another location.
   (E)   Exceptions to section. This section does not apply to government
entities.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93)
§ 51.018 USE OF SECURITY DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Accounting requirements. The Utility Manager shall keep or cause to be
kept accurate records of all security deposits, including, but not limited to,
the depositor's name, amount deposited, date of deposit, and deposits refunded,
   (B)   Administration of deposits. The Utility Manager shall administer cash
security deposits in accordance with the following rules:
      (1)   A deposit will be applied toward a payment of the final bill amount
due the city when service account is closed or becomes inactive due to
delinquency, transfer of ownership or other reasons.
      (2)   A deposit made to secure service to premises may be transferred
toward deposit requirement at another premises within the city where service is
to be provided in the same depositor's name.
      (3)   No interest shall be payable to customer for security deposits held
by the city.
      (4)   Deposits may be invested or used for capital improvements, but
sufficient cash shall be accounted for and kept on hand to meet the normally
anticipated level of funds.
      (5)   Deposits can only be refunded to the person whose name the utility
account bears or agent of the person.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.019 SECURITY DEPOSIT REFUNDS.
   (A)   Refund requirements. The Utility Manager may refund a security deposit
to the customer, in accordance with division (B) of this section, when the
customer meets the following requirements:
      (1)   The customer requests the termination of services;
      (2)   The customer has abandoned the account without application for
termination; and
      (3)   The customer has been receiving service for 12 continuous months;
has had no turn-off notice for nonpayment with the 12-month period; the
customer has not made payment during the 12-month period with a check returned
due to insufficient funds; and the customer has no delinquent utility bills
outstanding.
   (B)   Method of credit. A refund will be credited to the customer's bill. If
a refund is greater than the outstanding bill, the remaining portion of the
refund will be produced in a city check and mailed to the customer's last known
address. If a refund is less than the outstanding bill, the remaining amount
due will be billed to the customer.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93)
§ 51.020 SECURITY DEPOSIT AMOUNTS.
   The amount of a security deposit is governed by the size of the meter
installed as follows:
   (A)   5/8 × 3/4 meter. There shall be a $75 deposit per meter.
   (B)   3/4 × 3/4 meter. There shall be a $75 deposit per meter.
   (C)   1 × 1 meter.  There shall be a $125 deposit per meter.
   (D)   1½ × 1½ meter. There shall be a $150 deposit per meter.
   (E)   2 × 2 meter. There shall be a $175 deposit per meter.
   (F)   All meter sizes 3 and above.  There shall be a $225 deposit per meter.
   (G)   The security deposit for customers 65 years of age or older opening a
residential account shall be waived.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93; Am. Ord. 09-2005-57, passed 9-13-05; Am.
Ord. 04-2011-15, passed 4-26-11)
§ 51.021 PAYMENTS OF FEES; DELINQUENCY; DISCONTINUANCE OR REFUSAL OF SERVICE;
NOTICE OF DISCONTINUANCE.
   (A)   Payment of services. Rates and charges for water, sewer and refuse
services rendered by the city shall be billed to the customer of such services
on the same utility bill, and the customer shall not be permitted to make
payment for any one service separately, but charges for all services received
by the customer must be paid at the same time. The Water Utilities Department
shall send the customer a monthly bill indicating, but not limited to:
      (1)   The customer account number;
      (2)   The customer name and service address;
      (3)   The service date period and the due date;
      (4)   The amount due for each service rendered, any and all previous
delinquent charges, plus penalty, if any, still due and owing, the amount if
the bill is paid by the due date; and
      (5)   The amount, including the late payment penalty as set out in
division (B) of this section, if not paid on or before the due date.
   (B)   When charges are delinquent — bill items. Except where otherwise
provided by application between the customer and the city, charges for services
become delinquent if payment is not received by the Water Utilities Department
on or before the due date, which is a minimum of ten days after bill rendering.
After the due date, the customer must pay the bill amount plus a 10% late
penalty. The Water Utilities Department shall send the customer a notice of
discontinuance indicating, but not limited to:
      (1)   The customer account number;
      (2)   The customer name and service address;
      (3)   The service date and the due date;
      (4)   The amount due for services rendered (including all previous
delinquent charges, plus penalty); and
      (5)   The amount, including the late payment penalty.
   (C)   Bill not received. Failure to receive a bill from the Water Utilities
Department does not relieve a customer or other person liable for charges under
this chapter from liability for service.
   (D)   Authority to discontinue service. The Utility Manager may refuse
application for service, discontinue service, or refuse to restore service to:
      (1)   A customer who fails to pay any charges due under this chapter
within seven days after the sending of notice of discontinuance;
      (2)   A person who violates any portion of:
         (a)   §
51.029(A) or (B);
         (b)   §
51.023;
         (c)   The Plumbing Code of the city;
         (d)   The Health Code of the city.
      (3)   A person making application for service to property at an address,
if the person has delinquent charges outstanding at another address; or
      (4)   A customer at any premises if the Utility Manager determines that a
substantial waste of water, or a health hazard is occurring as a result of
leaking, damaged, open or disconnected private laterals, pipes, or drains on
the premises.
   (E)   Cutting and plugging connections. The Utility Manager's authority to
discontinue service includes the right to cut and plug water or wastewater
connections to private property. The costs of cutting and plugging connections
will be charged to the customer in addition to the delinquent charges due.
   (F)   Restoration of service. Discontinued service will not be restored
until the customer or other person who has or accepts legal responsibility for
violations committed or charges unpaid either pays all charges due (including
the charges to restore connections), makes arrangements for payment
satisfactory to the Utility Manager, or, where applicable, ceases violation of
the particular code provision in question. The decision to restore service
while delinquent charges or code violations still exist rests solely with the
Utility Manager.
   (G)   Notice of discontinuance. The Utility Manager must notify a customer
in the following manner before discontinuing service:
      (1)   The Utility Manager must send the customer at least seven days
advance notice of pending discontinuance.
      (2)   The notice must provide a statement of reasons for cutoff and a
statement of delinquent charges due, where applicable. The notice must also
provide a time, place and means by which the customer may cure the delinquency
or violation, or dispute the validity of the reasons for discontinuance.
      (3)   The notice may be served either in person or by mail.
      (4)   Additionally, in cases to master-metered accounts, the Utility
Manager must cause a notice of pending discontinuance to be posted on the door
of each dwelling unit known to be occupied and in a conspicuous place within
the property manager's office or the common area of the premises.
   (H)   Exceptions to notice requirement. Division (G) of this section does
not apply to discontinuance of service resulting from a violation of this
chapter if the Utility Manager determines that immediate discontinuance is
necessary to prevent an imminent threat or occurrence of:
      (1)   Harm to the health or safety of persons;
      (2)   Damage to city or private property; or
      (3)   Contamination of the water system.
   (I)   Customer's request to discontinue service. Upon a customer's request
for discontinuance of service, the Utility Manager may discontinue treated or
untreated water service to the customer. Upon receipt of the application for
termination, the Utility Manager may remove the water meter and service
connections. However, the customer is liable for all charges incurred prior to
removal of the meter. Where service is furnished through more than one meter,
the customer may request discontinuance of one or more meters and thereafter be
billed on the basis of the remaining meter or meters.
   (J)   Penalty fee not charged. Persons, with single-family residential
accounts, who are 65 years of age or older may request an exemption from the
late payment charge. This is to accommodate those persons who receive their
social security checks later than they receive the utility bill. This exemption
shall apply to only one residential account at a time, and shall remain in
effect, without renewal, as long as the account name does not change. Proof of
age shall be required.
   (K)   Cumulative remedies. Enforcement of this section does not waive any
additional remedies, civil or criminal, available to the city under law.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.022 (RESERVED).
§ 51.023 METERS — REQUIRED; READ MONTHLY; CHARGE; WATER LEAKAGE.
   (A)   Meters generally. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, a
customer shall receive water service only when measured through a meter. The
Utility Manager shall determine the size, type, number, and location of meters
and connections to meters to be installed. Each meter shall be read, when
possible, once a month and a bill rendered accordingly.
   (B)   Meters reading. The meters shall be read to the nearest cubic foot
monthly at approximately the same time each month.
   (C)   Estimated bill circumstances.  The quantity of water delivered to a
premises may be estimated under any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The meter reader is unable to procure a reading of the meter
because access to the meter is obstructed or made hazardous by an animal or
circumstance.
      (2)   The meter does not properly function, or the equipment used to read
the meter does not properly function.
      (3)   Adverse weather or an act of God prevents the reading of the meter.
      (4)   No meter is in place at the premises.
      (5)   For some other reason, a meter reading is not available to the
billing section of the Utility Department at the time of preparing a bill to a
customer.
   (D)   Basis for estimate. An estimate shall be based on past consumption
experience at the premises. If there is no past consumption experience, then an
estimate will be based on consumption of the same class under similar
conditions using the best information available. If a customer demonstrates
that an estimated bill is excessive, then the Utility Department shall render a
bill based on a revised estimate.
   (E)   Meter reading verification. If the customer contends that a
discrepancy appears in a bill or meter reading, the Utility Manager will
inspect the meter and verify the reading, or cause same to be done.
   (F)   Water leakage.  
      (1)   When a customer experiences a substantial increase in water or
wastewater usage from a hidden water leak, the Utility Department will adjust
the amount and bill the customer in accordance with the rates prescribed in §
51.030. The Utility Department will adjust a bill only if a customer presents a
plumber's statement, or the customer's written statement, which indicates the
water leak was not reasonably detectable from the surface, the leak has been
repaired, and the type of repairs made. The Utility Manager may request
additional information before determining if a water leak was reasonably
detectable based upon facts presented to the Utility Manager. A customer may
receive only one adjustment during a 12-month period, unless the Utility
Manager determines that extenuating circumstances justify allowing additional
adjustments.
      (2)   The leak adjustment will be 40% of the increased billing due to the
leak for the month the leak is repaired and the previous month if leakage was
occurring.
      (3)   The adjustment will be calculated as follows: determine an average
usage for that month using the three previous years. That usage which exceeds
the average will be adjusted 40%.
   (G)   Return of meters. All water meters furnished to customers are property
of the city and will be returned immediately upon request of the Utility
Manager. Failure to return a meter when requested constitutes grounds for
discontinuance or refusal of service.
   (H)   Maintenance of meters. The Utility Department is responsible for
maintenance, inspection and repair of all water meters. When any act, neglect
or carelessness of the customer or owner of any premises causes damage to a
meter requiring adjustment, repair or replacement, the resulting expense will
be charged against the customer or owner.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93; Am. Ord. 04-2011-14, passed 4-26-11)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.024 METERS — EXPOSING TO DAMAGE; NOTICE OF WORK AFFECTING SYSTEMS; MOVING.
   (A)   Exposure to damage. A person shall not build a driveway, sidewalk or
other improvement that:
      (1)   Exposes a meter to damage from vehicular traffic; or
      (2)   Causes obstruction of access to a meter for operation, repair,
removal, replacement, inspection, reading or maintenance purposes.
   (B)   Notice of work affecting meters. A person who does work of any nature
on a street, alley or sidewalk within the city must notify the Utility Manager
at least ten days in advance of the removal, raising, or lowering of a water
meter that may interfere with the work. Where the Utility Manager is not
notified, damage to any part of the meter resulting from the work will be
charged against the person or that person's agent or contractors performing the
work. At no time will the meter and meter box be allowed to be buried.
   (C)   Request to move meter. The owner or occupant of premises adversely
affected by the location of a meter bay make written application to the Utility
Manager to have the device moved, under the following conditions:
      (1)   The Utility Manager may approve the application if he determines
that the move will not interfere with normal Department operations and will not
cause damage to the water system. The decision of the Utility Manager is final.
      (2)   Upon the approval of the application, the Utility Manager will
furnish the applicant an estimate of costs to move the meter.
      (3)   Upon deposit of the estimated cost by the applicant, the Utility
Department will make the agreed change in location.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.025 REVENUE COLLECTION REGULATIONS.
   The Utility Manager is authorized to promulgate regulations and procedures,
not in conflict with this code, the city charter, or applicable state and
federal laws or regulations, concerning the collection of charges for services
and the handling of customer accounts, receipts, and reports.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93)
§ 51.026 JOINT OWNERS OR USERS; LIABILITY; TRANSFER OF ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   Charges a lien. When delinquent charges remain unpaid and the
procedures of §
51.027 are followed, those delinquent charges shall constitute a lien against
the property served.
   (B)   Personal liability. The customer of record has the primary personal
liability for services rendered under this chapter. Nevertheless, if service is
provided to property owned by a person or entity jointly with the customer of
record, or if the customer of record is an agent or property manager for one or
more owners of property, the joint owners shall not be treated as new
customers, but shall remain jointly and severally liable with the customer of
record for unpaid delinquent charges. The Utility Manager may refuse or
discontinue service in the same manner provided for in §
51.016 until all delinquent charges are paid.
   (C)   Liability of spouses. Spouses receiving service to premises they
jointly own or occupy are deemed to be joint customers of record,
notwithstanding that only one spouse may have signed an application, and shall
be jointly and severally liable for unpaid delinquent charges.
   (D)   Liability of tenants. Where service is provided to a tenant in a
single-family residence, or to more than one residential or commercial tenant
through a master meter or single service connection, and the landlord is the
customer of record, a tenant or duly organized association of tenants may
establish a new service account without being held responsible for any previous
unpaid charges owed by the landlord if the appropriate facilities are in place
and the tenant or association of tenants otherwise meets the applicable
requirements of this chapter; however, the Utility Manager may refuse service
if it appears the application is being made for the purpose of assisting the
landlord to avoid payment of delinquent charges or for the purpose of
defrauding the city. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require
the Utility Department to apportion charges or to provide individually-metered
service at a master-metered premises.
   (E)   Transfer of accounts. Where a person liable for delinquent charges at
one address is found to have an account in his name at another address, the
delinquent amounts due at the previous address shall be transferred to the
account at the new address, and service discontinued at the new address until
the delinquent amounts are paid.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.027 WATER LIEN PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Authority. The city is authorized, in accordance with the provisions
of Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 402.0025, as it may be amended from time to time, to
perfect the lien upon property which occurs as provided in §
51.026, for the purpose of securing the payment of delinquent charges incurred
as a result of service to the property. This section shall not apply to
delinquent charges for service where a tenant is the customer of record, if the
owner of the property served has sent notice to the Utility Manager that the
property is rental property.
   (B)   When lien is perfected. The lien may be perfected only when charges
incurred by a customer for service become delinquent and when the Utility
Manager determines that other means for fully collecting the delinquency are
inadequate or unavailable.
   (C)   Form of lien. Upon request of the Utility Manager, the form of the
lien must be prepared by the City Attorney. The form must contain:
      (1)   A statement indicating the purpose of the lien;
      (2)   The address of the property which is the subject of the lien, where
the address is ascertainable;
      (3)   A complete legal description of the property which is the subject
of the lien; and
      (4)   The amount of delinquent charges, including penalties, interest and
collection costs, if any, incurred upon the property as of the date of
execution of the lien.
   (D)   Execution and recording. The lien must be:
      (1)   Executed by the City Manager and acknowledged by a notary public of
the state;
      (2)   Approved as to form by the City Attorney; and
      (3)   Filed in the deed or lien records of the county.
   (E)   Priority of lien. The lien is superior to all other liens except a
bona fide mortgage lien recorded prior to the recording of the city's lien in
the deed or lien records of the county.
   (F)   Additional charges; correction lien. Should additional delinquent
charges be incurred subsequent to the date of the original lien's execution, a
correction lien may be executed and filed, in the form provided above, fixing
the additional delinquent charges. The correction lien, when filed of record,
shall relate back to the date of recording of the original lien and shall
become a part of the original lien.
   (G)   Suit to foreclose. The City Attorney, at the request of the Utility
Manager, may file suit to judicially foreclose the lien in a state court of
competent jurisdiction. The suit may not be filed earlier than 60 days after
the recording date of the lien.
   (H)   Release of lien. Upon certification of the Utility Manager that all
delinquent charges which existed against the property have been fully paid, the
City Manager is authorized to execute a release of the lien. The release shall
be prepared and approved as to form by the City Attorney and shall be duly
acknowledged. After execution, the Utility Manager must immediately file the
release in the deed or lien records of the county.
   (I)   Cumulative remedies. This section is cumulative of any other remedies,
methods of collection or security available to the Utility Manager or the city
under the charter and ordinances of the city or under state law. This section
does not affect the Utility Manager's authority to refuse or to furnish service
when delinquent charges exist.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.028 NOTICE OF WATER LIEN.
   (A)   Form of notice. Prior to recording of the water lien, the Utility
Manager shall send notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that a
lien will be fixed on the property in accordance with law. The notice must
provide a time, place and means by which the charges causing the lien may be
paid or disputed. The notice must be sent to:
      (1)   The customer in whose name the account for service to the property
exists; and
      (2)   The last known record owner of the property according to the tax
rolls of the city, if the customer is not the owner.
   (B)   Absence of notice. Absence of receipt of notice does not affect the
enforceability of a lien perfected under §
51.027.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93)
§ 51.029 USING ANOTHER PERSON'S WATER; USE BEFORE FILING APPLICATION FOR
SERVICE.
   (A)   Use without consent. A person commits an offense if where water is
furnished to any premises, the person knowingly takes water from any faucet or
water connection on the premises without first securing the consent of, and
making arrangements with, the owner of the premises or the customer in whose
name the account exists. This section does not apply to a person employed by
the city who is engaged in work of an emergency nature in his official capacity
as a city employee.
   (B)   Use without application.  A person commits an offense if he knowingly
diverts or uses water from any part of the water system without making
application and without receiving the Utility Manager's consent to use a
service. Absence of an account for service on file with the Utility Department
constitutes prima facie proof of the lack of the Utility Manager's consent to
use a service.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.030 RATES FOR TREATED WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   Form of rate. The monthly rate for treated water service to a customer
consists of:
      (1)   Service demand charge; and
      (2)   A usage charge.
   (B)   Billing cycle. In this section, water used per month is based upon the
billing cycle of the Utility Department.
   (C)   Rate tables. The Utility Manager shall charge customers for treated
water service in accordance with the following tables:
      (1)   For utility accounts inside city limits.
         Water Usage       Rate/Month
         0 gallons and over      $6.00 per 1,000 gallons
 
Monthly Base Service Demand Charge
3/4" meter              $22.53
1" meter                40.14
1 1/2" meter and larger 90.32
 
      (2)   For utility accounts outside city limits.
         Water Usage       Rate/Month
         0 gallons and over      $7.47 per 1,000 gallons
 
Monthly Base Service Demand Charge
3/4" meter              $29.14
1" meter                40.14
1 1/2" meter and larger 90.32
 
      (3)   Treated water service rates include a rate for water rights from
the Brazos River Authority (BRA) herein called the system water rate. The
system water rate, which is adjusted annually by BRA, shall be passed through
to the customers of the City of Cleburne’s water utility. The treated water
service rate shall be applied to the residential and commercial customers’ base
rates in §
51.030(C)(1) and (2).
   (D)   Sprinkler system. Water, separately metered, used solely for lawn
sprinkler systems shall be billed according to the rate tables in division (C)
of this section. No service demand charge shall be applied if zero usage is
indicated on the meter.
   (E)   Applicability of rates to meters. The charges for water service in
division (C) of this section apply to each meter which exists at a customer’s
premises.
   (F)   Multi-family dwelling units.  All multi-family dwelling units of five
or more units, which are not separately metered, shall be charged for services
based on meter size and rates in the following tables:
Service Demand Charge Each Month
For utility accounts inside city limits: For utility accounts outside city
                                         limits:
Meter (inches) Fee                       Meter (inches) Fee
Service Demand Charge Each Month
For utility accounts inside city limits: For utility accounts outside city
                                         limits:
Meter (inches) Fee                       Meter (inches) Fee
      ¾ $   22.53                    ¾ $   29.14
      1     38.09                     1     49.26
      1½   127.07                    1½   163.92
      2     381.20                    2     491.75
      2 �   381.20                    2 �   491.75
3 and larger      381.20              3 and larger      491.75
 
 
Per 1,000 Gallons Charge Each Month
For utility accounts inside city    For utility accounts outside city limits:
limits:
0 gallons and over, per 1,000 $6.00 0 gallons and over, per 1,000 gallons $7.47
gallons
 
   (G)   Rates where no meter exists. If a customer is without a meter, the
minimum usage charge is based on 1,333 cubic feet (10,000 gallons) of water
used per month at the rate specified in division (C) of this section. In cases
where a metering device is impracticable, a rate will be determined by the
Utility Manager.
   (H)   Reuse water. All reuse water will be billed at 75% of the potable
water rates as shown in division (C) Rate Tables above.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93; Am. Ord. 9-1994-43, passed 9-13-94; Am. Ord.
9-1996-67, passed 9-24-96; Am. Ord. 1-1997-03, passed 1-28-97; Am. Ord. 9-1997-
70, passed 9-9-97; Am. Ord. 9-1998-52, passed 9-8-98; Am. Ord. 10-1998-67,
passed 10-13-98; Am. Ord. 9-1999-86, passed 9-14-99; Am. Ord. 9-2000-41, passed
9-12-00; Am. Ord. 9-2001-63, passed 9-25-01; Am. Ord. 9-2002-67, passed 9-10-
02; Am. Ord. 09-2003-41, passed 9-9-03; Am. Ord. 09-2004-53, passed 9-14-04;
Am. Ord. 09-2005-57, passed 9-13-05; Am. Ord. 09-2006-75, passed 9-12-06; Am.
Ord. 09-2007-46, passed 9-11-07; Am. Ord. 09-2008-56, passed 9-9-08; Am. Ord.
10-2009-60, passed 10-13-09; Am. Ord. 07-2010-35, passed 7-13-10; Am. Ord. 09-
2010-54, passed 9- 14-10; Am. Ord. 09-2011-51, passed 9-13-11; Am. Ord. 08-
2012-33, passed 8-28-2012; Am. Ord. 09-2013-52, passed 9-10-13; Am. Ord. 09-
2014-80, passed 9-23-14; Am. Ord. 09-2019-58, passed 9-24-2019; Am. Ord. 09-
2019-59, passed 9-24-2019; Am. Ord. 03-2023-16, passed 3-28-2023) Penalty, see
§
51.999
§ 51.031 RATES FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE.
   (A)   Form of rate. The monthly rate for wastewater service to a customer
consists of:
      (1)   A service demand charge;
      (2)   A usage charge; and
      (3)   A surcharge for excessive concentration of waste, if applicable.
   (B)   Billing cycle. In this section, water used per month is based upon the
billing cycle of the Utility Department.
   (C)   Rate tables. The Utility Manager shall charge a customer for
wastewater service based on water used in accordance with the following tables:
      (1)   Residential accounts. There shall be a maximum of 13,500 gallons of
water usage used to compute a residential wastewater bill.
      (2)   Commercial accounts. There shall be no maximum water usage used to
compute a commercial sewer account.
      (3)   Sprinkler accounts. No sewage charge shall be placed on accounts
that strictly use water for a sprinkler system.
 
Wastewater Service Rates
For utility accounts inside city limits: For utility accounts outside city
                                         limits:
Water Usage        Rate/Month            Water Usage        Rate/Month
0 gallons and over $3.86 per 1,000       0 gallons and over $4.83 per 1,000
                   gallons                                  gallons
 
Service Demand Charge Each Month
For utility accounts inside city For utility accounts outside city limits:
limits:
Water Meter Size  Fee            Water Meter Size (inches) Fee
(inches)
Service Demand Charge Each Month
For utility accounts inside city For utility accounts outside city limits:
limits:
Water Meter Size  Fee            Water Meter Size (inches) Fee
(inches)
      ¾    $   17.08         ¾            $   21.35
      1        17.08          1                36.90
      1½      66.50          1½              83.13
      2        118.16         2                147.70
      2 ½     184.69         2 ½             230.86
3 and larger         204.05   3 and larger                 346.30
 
   (D)   Multi-family dwelling units — rate calculation.  All multi- family
dwelling units of five or more units which are not separately metered shall be
charged for sewer service based on water meter size and rates in the following
tables:
Service Demand Charge Each Month
For utility accounts inside city limits: For utility accounts outside city
                                         limits:
Meter (inches) Fee                       Meter (inches) Fee
Service Demand Charge Each Month
For utility accounts inside city limits: For utility accounts outside city
                                         limits:
Meter (inches) Fee                       Meter (inches) Fee
      ¾    $   17.08              ¾    $   21.35
      1        29.52               1        36.90
      1½      66.50               1½      83.13
      2        118.13              2        147.70
      2 �      184.69              2 �      230.86
3 and larger         277.04        3 and larger         346.30
 
 
Per 1,000 Gallons Charge Each Month
For utility accounts inside city    For utility accounts outside city limits:
limits:
0 gallons and over, per 1,000 $3.86 0 gallons and over, per 1,000 gallons $4.83
gallons
There shall be no maximum water usage used to compute a multi-family unit
wastewater account.
 
   (E)   Where residential water service is not used.  If a residential
customer does not receive water service solely from the city, the Utility
Manager shall estimate water used per month to determine the usage charge in
division (C) in accordance with §
51.030(G).
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93; Am. Ord. 9-1994-45, passed 9-13-94; Am. Ord.
9-1996-68, passed 9-24-96; Am. Ord. 1-1997-04, passed 1-28-97; Am. Ord. 9-1997-
71, passed 9-9-97; Am. Ord. 9-1998-51, passed 9-8-98; Am. Ord. 9-1999-85,
passed 9-14-99; Am. Ord. 9-2000-41, passed 9-12-00; Am. Ord. 9-2001-64, passed
9-25-01; Am. Ord. 9-2002-68, passed 9-10-02; Am. Ord. 09-2003-40, passed 9-9-
03; Am. Ord. 09-2004-54, passed 9-14-04; Am. Ord. 09-2005-58, passed 9-13-05;
Am. Ord. 04-2006-34, passed 4-25-06; Am. Ord. 09-2006-76, passed 9-12-06; Am.
Ord. 09-2007-47, passed 9-11-07; Am. Ord. 09-2008-57, passed 9-9-08; Am. Ord.
10-2009-61, passed 10-13-09; Am. Ord. 09-2010-55, passed 9-14-10; Am. Ord. 09-
2011-52, passed 9- 13-11; Am. Ord. 08-2012-34, passed 8-28-2012; Am. Ord. 09-
2013-53, passed 9-10-13; Am. Ord. 09-2014-81, passed 9-23-14; Am. Ord. 09-
2019-59, passed 9-24-19; Am. Ord. 03-2023-16, passed 3-28-23) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.032 CHARGES FOR USE OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
   A person requesting use of water from a fire hydrant pursuant to §
51.035 shall pay the following application charges.
   (A)   A deposit of $2,000 for each meter assembly (water meter and backflow
device) will be required to set up an account. This amount will be refunded
when service is discontinued and the meter assembly has been returned. The
return amount will be less any unpaid fees for services, and any cost to repair
damage to the meter assembly in excess of normal wear.
   (B)   There shall be a connection or relocation charge of $100 to connect or
relocate the fire hydrant meter assembly to a fire hydrant for metered water
service. Connection and removal shall be made by city utility personnel only.
If a fire hydrant meter is moved from its original approved location by anyone
other than city personnel, a penalty will be charged as provided in §
51.999.
   (C)   A usage charge for water will be billed at the general service rates
in §
51.030, plus the service demand charge based on the following schedule:
 
                                                   Per Cent Increase
1 cu. ft. to 33,422 cu. ft. (250,000 gallons)       25%
33,423 cu. ft. to 66,845 cu. ft. (500,000 gallons)  30%
66,845 cu. ft. to 100,267 cu. ft. (750,000 gallons) 35%
100,266 cu. ft. and over                            40%
 
   (D)   The service demand charge per month for the use of a fire hydrant
meter will be the same as §
51.030(F), based on the size of the meter (all fire hydrant meters are three
inches or larger).
   (E)   A beginning reading shall be made of the meter when installed on the
fire hydrant and an ending reading shall be made when it is requested by the
customer to remove the meter from the fire hydrant. The utility bill for water
service shall be computed using these readings. If the fire hydrant meter is in
use for more than one month period, a reading shall be taken at the end of each
month, and a utility bill shall be prepared and mailed to the customer at the
end of each month the meter is in use.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93; Am. Ord. 01-2007-06, passed 1-23-07)
§ 51.033 INDUSTRIAL WASTE CHARGE RATE FORMULA.
   The person responsible for industrial waste discharge is responsible for the
following charges: Service Demand Charge, Volume, biological oxygen demand
(BOD), total suspended solids (TSS) and total dissolved solids (TDS) in
accordance with the following rate table:
 
Service Demand Charge, per month            $ 12.58
Volume Charge, per month, per 1,000 gallons $ 5.17
BOD, per lb., per month                     $ 0.49
TSS, per lb., per month                     $ 0.45
TDS, per lb., per month                     $ 0.24
 
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93; Am. Ord. 9-1994-45, passed 9-13-94; Am. Ord.
10-1997-88, passed 10-28-97; Am. Ord. 9-1998-51, passed 9-8-98; Am. Ord. 9-
1999-85, passed 9-14-99; Am. Ord. 9-2000-41, passed 9-12-00; Am. Ord. 9-2001-
64, passed 9-25-01; Am. Ord. 9-2002-68, passed 9-10-02; Am. Ord. 09-2003-40,
passed 9-9-03; Am. Ord. 09-2004-54, passed 9-14-04; Am. Ord. 09-2005-58, passed
9-13-05; Am. Ord. 04-2006-34, passed 4-25-06; Am. Ord. 09-2006-76, passed 9-12-
06; Am. Ord. 09-2007-47, passed 9-11-07; Am. Ord. 09- 2008-57, passed 9-9-08;
Am. Ord. 10-2009-61, passed 10-13-09; Am. Ord. 09-2010-55, passed 9-14-10; Am.
Ord. 09-2011-52, passed 9-13-11; Am. Ord. 08-2012-34, passed 8-28-2012; Am.
Ord. 09-2013-53, passed 9- 10-13; Am. Ord. 09-2014-81, passed 9-23-14) Penalty,
see §
51.999
§ 51.034 MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES AND PROVISIONS; RATES WHERE NO CHARGE SPECIFIED.
   (A)   Service application fees. Upon request for service, new or transfer, a
fee of $10 will be assessed to the account.
   (B)   Returned check charge. A charge of $25 will be assessed when a
customer pays a service bill by check, the check is presented to the bank, and
the bank does not honor the check.
   (C)   Refusal of payment. The Utility Manager shall be authorized to refuse
payment of services by check on those customers that have a history of returned
checks.
   (D)   Missed appointment, trip for turn off/on, or rereading of meter
charge. If a customer requests an appointment for service and they are not
present at the service location at the agreed upon time, a $25 fee will be
assessed for an additional service call before 3:00 p.m. If the customer makes
a request for same day service after 3:00 p.m., the service fee will be $50. A
service fee of $25 will be charged for meter rereads if there is no change in
the meter reading. No fee will be charged for customer-requested turn off/on
for repairs unless the request is received after 3:00 p.m. for same day
service. If the request is received after 3:00 p.m. for same day service. If
the request is received after 3:00 p.m., there will be a $50 charge for same
day service, or the turn off/on will be scheduled for the following business
day at no charge.
   (E)   Customer-requested testing of meter. The Utility Manager will test
customers’ meters at their request for a fee as follows:
 
Meter Size   Fee
" to 1"      $25
1-½" to 2"  $50
3" and above $100
If it is determined that the meter is not reading correctly, the charge will
be reversed.
 
   (F)   Where no charge specified. When charges for a service are not
specified in this chapter, the Utility Manager shall establish charges based on
the cost of performing the services, including but not limited to, such
services as moving of meter locations, repair to damaged facilities, field
location of meters, installation of meter box lids, replacement of one meter
with another meter, and installation and removal of temporary service.
   (G)   Where money credited. All sums of money collected as a charge or fee
authorized under this chapter, at the rates specified in this chapter, shall be
credited to the appropriate water and wastewater fund of the city.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93; Am. Ord. 01-2007-06, passed 1-23-07; Am.
Ord. 03-2014-17, passed 3-25-14; Am. Ord. 05-2014-45, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord.
04-2016-16, passed 4-12-16)
§ 51.035 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   Permission to use. Fire hydrants are used in extinguishing fires by
the Fire Department. Fire hydrants cannot be used for any other purpose unless
approved by the Utility Manager. The Utility Manager may disapprove of the use
of a fire hydrant meter assembly at his or her discretion. If approved, the
fire hydrant can only be opened only by authorized employees of the city
(Utility, Street, Sanitation or Fire Departments). Any other business or person
who wishes to use a fire hydrant must make application with the Utilities
Department under the following conditions. The applicant must:
      (1)   Use a water meter furnished by the Utility Department;
      (2)   Make the meter readily available for reading by the Utility
Department each month it is used; and
      (3)   Notify the Utility Manager to move or after finishing use of the
hydrant.
   (B)   Improper use. Failure to abide by the conditions of division (A) is
sufficient cause to prohibit further use of the fire hydrant, and to refuse to
grant subsequent permits for use of a fire hydrant. A person commits an offense
if he or she knowingly:
      (1)   Uses water from a fire hydrant without an application permit with a
deposit from the Utility Department; or
      (2)   Violates any of the terms and conditions of an application permit
granted under this section.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93; Am. Ord. 01-2007-06, passed 1-23-07)
§ 51.036 NO FREE WATER.
   No free water, sewer or refuse service shall be allowed, and to the extent
that the city or any of its departments avail themselves of the service and
facilities provided, these Departments shall pay therefor the same rates as
prescribed in this chapter.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.037 TAMPERING WITH OR DAMAGING SYSTEMS; UNLAWFUL USE OF WATER; PRIMA FACIE
EVIDENCE.
   (A)   Tampering with or damaging system. A person commits an offense if,
without the written permission of the City Manager or the Utilities Manager, he
knowingly:
      (1)   Damages or destroys any part of a water meter, connections, cutoff
device or locking device;
      (2)   Tampers with any part of a water meter, connections, cutoff device
or locking device.
   (B)   Certain conditions creating prima facie evidence of tampering. For
purposes of this section, it is prima facie evidence that a person has tampered
under division (A)(2) above if the person is a customer, owner or person in
control of the premises and:
      (1)   Water is prevented from passing through a meter used or furnished
by the Utility Department to supply water to the premises;
      (2)   A meter used or furnished by the Utility Department is prevented
from correctly registering the quantity of water supplied to the premises;
      (3)   Water is diverted or bypassed by the use of a device, from or
around a pipe, main, meter, hydrant or other connection of the Utility
Department;
      (4)   A meter or service connection of the Utility Department used for
service to premises is removed; or
      (5)   Wastewater is prevented or diverted from flowing from premises into
the wastewater system.
   (C)   Prima facie evidence of knowledge. The existence on premises of a
device used for any of the unlawful purposes stated in this section shall
constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge of the unlawful purpose on the
part of the customer, owner or person in control of the premises.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.038 (RESERVED).
§ 51.039 CITY RELEASED FROM LIABILITY IF CUSTOMER CANNOT BE PRESENT WHEN WATER
SERVICE IS INITIATED.
   (A)   Release of liability.
      (1)   Normally, the customer should be present when water service is
turned on in order to avoid inadvertent water damage due to faucets being open,
broken pipes, and the like. Appointments will be made for this purpose. If a
customer or his authorized agent cannot be present, the customer may sign a
form provided in the Utility Billing Office which releases the city from
liability for any damages at the customer's service address as a result of
turning on the water.
      (2)   The release of liability must be signed by the customer in whose
name an account is being established. The customer is agreeing that he assumes
responsibility for damages that may result when the water is turned on. The
signer of the document must present identification, have his signature
witnessed, and the document notarized.
      (3)   Under no circumstances will water be turned on unless the customer
is present at the service address or has provided the city with the release of
liability.
   (B)   Exception.  If at the time water is turned on a leak is suspected, the
water will be turned off again. The customer or his authorized agent bust be
present when the water is turned on again and a $10 service fee will be
required for the additional service call.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93)
§ 51.040 INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE BY WATER UTILITIES DEPARTMENT; LIABILITY.
   (A)   The Water Utilities Department shall have the right to temporarily
discontinue, disconnect, and reconnect water supply without notice to all
customers for the purposes of making repairs, connections, extensions, and
cleaning of mains, machinery, reservoirs or any part of the water system. The
Water Utilities Department shall have the right to temporarily disconnect
service to a customer having a break on their private line should that break
present a hazard to the general public. None of the terms of this chapter shall
ever be construed as requiring the Water Utilities Department to maintain a
specific constant pressure in its lines.
   (B)   All persons having devices such as, but not limited to, boilers or air
conditioning equipment which utilize, employ, or make use of water in any
manner whatsoever, which may become damaged due to interruption of water
service, and which are supplied directly with city water, do so at their own
risk. The city shall not be liable for any damage that may occur as a result of
the water being cut off for any purpose, or as a result of the breaking of any
pipe or fixture by pressure of the water from the city mains.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93)
§ 51.041 ESTABLISHMENT AND FUNDING OF WATER/WASTEWATER RATE MITIGATION AND
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT RESERVE.
   (A)   A reserve is hereby established, to be maintained by the Finance
Department and separately maintained from the other Water and Wastewater Fund,
to be designated the Water/Wastewater Rate Mitigation and Capital Improvement
Trust Reserve (the Reserve).
   (B)   The Water/Wastewater Rate Mitigation and Capital Improvement Reserve
shall be accounted for in the Water and Wastewater Fund.
   (C)   Contributions may vary from year to year when the Water and Wastewater
Fund has produced a surplus after payment of all operation and maintenance
expenses, debt service, and required contributions to reserves, if any.
Contributions shall be added to such Fund per the above criteria.
   (D)   At the option of the City Council, other sources of surplus finds, if
available, may be used to contribute to the Fund.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to mean that any
contribution to the Fund is mandatory, but such will be solely at the
discretion of the City Council.
(Ord. 8-2002-53, passed 8-13-02)
§ 51.042 EXPENDITURES FROM THE WATER/WASTEWATER RATE MITIGATION RESERVE;
PROHIBITED EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   Withdrawals from the Fund require the authorization of the City
Council. At the time of withdrawal, a plan to replenish the Fund over a
reasonable time frame shall be adopted by the City Council. The plan may or may
not include a rate increase, depending on the circumstances.
   (B)   Withdrawals from the Fund should be restricted to:
      (1)   Make up for a severe shortfall in funds where projected revenues
are not met, typically because of unusually wet weather or other unexpected
negative influence on revenue stream;
      (2)   Pay for catastrophic repair events of such magnitude that the cost
of such would initiate an unplanned rate increase or a greater than planned
rate increase (i.e. increases that would not have been needed if such event had
not occurred);
      (3)   Smooth a sharp rate increase necessitated by sudden increase in an
uncontrollable, ongoing expense; and/or
      (4)   To pay for capital improvement projects as necessary. At the time
of any such withdrawal, a plan to raise rates over a reasonable time period to
a level sufficient to cover the ongoing cost of the utility should be presented
to the Council and adopted.
   (C)   Withdrawal from the Fund should not be allowed for the following
reasons:
      (1)   To make any expenditure not clearly and directly for the operation,
maintenance, or repair of the water or wastewater system, or to stabilize the
rate structures thereof;
      (2)   To pay for expense made necessary as a result of growth, expansion,
or enhancement of existing services or inflation; or
      (3)   For the addition of permanent personnel or equipment.
(Ord. 8-2002-53, passed 8-13-02)
EXTENSION OF MAINS
§ 51.050 PURPOSE; WHERE FRONT FOOT RULE INEQUITABLE; NO VESTED RIGHTS. 
   (A)   The intent and purpose of this subchapter is to provide an equitable
charge for water and sewer mains as a proportionate distribution of the cost of
water and sanitary sewer mains extensions to serve property in the city on a
front foot basis.
   (B)   In case property or a tract of land is so situated or shaped that the
front foot rule creates an inequitable basis as between it and other tracts of
land in the city then in that event, the City Engineer shall determine the
proper charges in accord with the intent and purpose of this subchapter.
   (C)   No person shall acquire any vested rights under the terms and
provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 4-13-71)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.051 PRO RATA CHARGE.
   (A)   The Water Department of the city may extend water and sanitary sewer
mains in the streets and alleys, or easements, within the city limits in order
to permit connections by persons desiring and seeking water service and
sanitary sewer service. A charge, which shall be known as the “pro rata,” shall
be made against each lot or tract of land, and the owner thereof, whose water
or sewer line shall be hereafter connected to any water mains or sewer mains in
the city, and the charge shall be based on the following:
      (1)   Based upon the actual cost of installation to include all
engineering and appurtenances as reflected in a bonded contract.
      (2)   One-half of the cost to be distributed to property on each side of
the line or street.
   (B)   The above front foot rates shall apply to property fronting on streets
in areas platted into the usual rectangular lots or tracts of land, with a
depth of not to exceed 150 feet, where lots or tracts have a greater depth than
150 feet from the front street line, and are occupied or to be occupied
exclusively as dwelling places, then the additional depth shall not be
assessed. If the property is later subdivided, requiring an extension of mains
to serve same, then the terms of this subchapter shall govern. On lots or
tracts of land which extend through from one street to another with frontage on
both streets, and where the distance between the street lines is 260 feet or
more, then the pro rata charges herein provided shall be paid on both frontages
when a connection is secured to the lot or tract. where lots or tracts are
irregular in size or shape, then pro rata charges shall be based upon
equivalent rectangular lots or tracts using one front foot for each 150 square
feet of area, or the pro rata charges provided herein on the average frontage
of such tracts, whichever is least.
   (C)   Where lots or tracts are intended to be used for business, commercial,
or industrial purposes or have a depth greater than 150 feet from the front
street line, then the pro rata herein provided shall be paid on the frontage on
all streets which the property may abut minus 150 feet frontage for each corner
of the property abutting a street intersection. Should the property be
resubdivided whereby water and sewer mains extensions are required to serve
same, the terms of this subchapter shall apply.
   (D) In addition to the pro rata charge on water, the property owner must pay
a connection charge as established by the city.
('68 Code, § 29-31) (Ord. passed 4-13-71; Am. Ord. 12-1976-57, passed 12-14-76;
Am. Ord. 10-1980-34, passed 10-14-80; Am. Ord. 10-1984-43, passed 10-9-84; Am.
Ord. 7-1996-41, passed 7-23-96)
§ 51.052 WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES.
   (A)   The city will install and maintain all house laterals from the city
sewer mains to the nearest property or easement line, and all water service
connections from the city water main to the nearest property or easement line.
The city shall charge for the installation and maintenance of such sewer house
laterals and water services a sum sufficient to cover the average cost thereof,
plus the cost of the electronic water meter (meter will be the property of the
city), which shall be charged at and on the following rates or basis:
      (1)   Sewer lateral connection charge.
 
                                      4-inch   6-inch   8-inch
                                     $860     $895     $920
Boring (any TxDOT hwy or city street) Job cost Job cost Job cost
 
      (2)   Water service connection charge.
 
                      3/4-inch   1-inch     1-1/2-inch 2-inch     Over 2-inch
                     $925       $948       $975       $1,145     Job cost
Meter                 Meter cost Meter cost Meter cost Meter cost Meter cost
Boring (any TxDOT hwy Job cost   Job cost   Job cost   Job cost   Job cost
or city street)
Fire hydrant          Job cost   Job cost   Job cost   Job cost   Job cost
 
   (B)   The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of all
service lines between the property or easement line and the house.
(‘68 Code, § 29-32) (Ord. passed 4-13-71; Am. Ord. 12-1976-57, passed 12-14-76;
Am. Ord. 10-1980-34, passed 10-14-80; Am. Ord. 10-1984-43, passed 10-9-84; Am.
Ord. 9-1986-42, passed 9-23-86; Am. Ord. 7-1996-41, passed 7-23-96; Am. Ord. 9-
1999-86, passed 9-14-99; Am. Ord. 9-2000-40, passed 9-12-00; Am. Ord. 01-2005-
08, passed 1-25-05; Am. Ord. 01-2007-06, passed 1-23-07; Am. Ord. 08-2018-62,
passed 8-28-18) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.053 EXTENSION OF WATER AND SEWER LINES.
   (A)   Upon request of the owner, or his agent, of a given lot or tract of
land, for the purpose of this subchapter known as the “applicant,” accompanied
by the payment of the charges due under this subchapter, the city shall extend,
lay or construct all necessary sanitary sewer and water mains, including valves
and hydrants, a distance of 100 feet, plus the distance across the frontage
necessary to provide the service for which application has been made. The
property owner to be served shall be required to pay the charge herein provided
for. The owners of all intervening property served by the given main extension
shall be required to pay the charges provided for herein at such time as their
property is connected to the mains thus laid. Where an applicant for service
secured an extension and service under this particular option for main
extension, he shall pay the pro rata charges on all property owned by him which
is served by the extension requested. In applying the 100-foot rule, the
required extension of main shall be figured in such a manner as to leave out of
the calculation that portion of any main adjacent to property already having
other than a temporary water service and for which the pro rata charges thereon
have been paid or credited under the terms of this subchapter. Only one
extension under the 100-foot rule will be given to an individual during a 12-
month period.
   (B)   An exception to the above 100-foot rule shall be made where two or
more individual applicants desire water and/or sewer service and the nearest
applicant is more than 100 feet from existing lines, the city will extend their
mains upon payment of the charge due under this subchapter, provided, that
there is one customer for every 100 feet of such extension, excluding street
intersections and that portion of the extension adjacent to property already
having other than temporary water and/or sewer service.
   (C)   At the option of the city the following method for extending water and
sewer mains may be used where the applicant's property is more than 100 feet
from an existing water and sewer main. This method shall be available only for
use by an individual owner, person or corporation to secure water and sewer
service for the individual's residence or place of business. Where eligible for
this option, the owner may advance and pay into the city, the entire pro rata
costs, as set forth in this subchapter.
('68 Code, § 29-33) (Ord. passed 4-13-71; Am. Ord. 5-1985-29, passed 5-4-85;
Am. Ord. 7-1996-41, passed 7-23-96)
§ 51.054 CONNECTION WITH WATER MAINS TO BE MADE BY WATERWORKS DEPARTMENT.
   All connections with city water mains shall be made by the City Waterworks
Department at the direction of the City Engineer.
('68 Code, § 29-35) (Ord. passed 4-13-71; Am. Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93)
§ 51.055 CONTRACT BETWEEN CITY AND PROPERTY OWNER; NO REFUNDS AFTER EXPIRATION
OF TWENTY-YEAR PERIOD.
   A contract entered into by any property owner and the city under the
provisions of this subchapter shall be effective only for a period of twenty
years after the date of the contract. No refunds shall be made by the city to
any applicant or contracting party after the twenty-year period has expired.
('68 Code, § 29-36) (Ord. passed 4-13-71; Am. Ord. 7-1996-41, passed 7-23-96)
§ 51.056 APPLICATION FORMS; BINDING UPON EITHER PARTY.
   All applications for the extension of water or sanitary sewer lines
contemplated by the provisions of this subchapter shall be made on forms
provided by the City Engineering Department, which application need not be
binding upon either party until all conditions precedent have been met by the
applicant, required payments made.
('68 Code, § 29-37) (Ord. passed 4-13-71; Am. Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93)
§ 51.057 DEPOSIT FOR COST OF EXTENSIONS OR PRO RATA CHARGES; CITY NOT LIABLE
FOR PAYMENT OF INTEREST.
   Unless otherwise specifically provided in this section, all applicants shall
deposit the total cost of any water or sanitary sewer extensions to be made or
the required pro rata charges, whichever is greater, and the city shall never
be liable for the payment of interest on any deposits, payments or refunds
provided for in this subchapter.
('68 Code, § 29-38) (Ord. passed 4-13-71)
§ 51.058 LACK OF FUNDS.
   In no event may the city be required to make extensions or refunds under
provisions of this subchapter if there are no funds available for that purpose.
That nothing herein shall be deemed in any way to be an exclusive method of
enforcing the payment of the pro rata costs against the consumer and property
owners, and shall not be deemed in any manner to be a waiver of the city's
rights to validly assess the property owners and/or consumers concerned for
cost of the installation of standard size (8 inch) water or sewer mains to fix
and enforce liens against the property all of which may be done as provided by
ordinance in the manner prescribed by law.
('68 Code, § 29-39) (Ord. passed 4-13-71)
§ 51.059 CHARGES TO BE CREDITED TO WATER SEWER SYSTEM FUND.
   Any and all sums of money, hereinafter collected as a fee or connection
charge, at the rates set out in this subchapter, shall be credited to the water
and sewer system fund of the city.
('68 Code, § 29-40) (Ord. passed 4-13-71)
INDUSTRIAL WASTES
§ 51.070 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This subchapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the
wastewater collection and Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) for the city
and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws
including the Clean Water Act, being 33 USC 1251 et seq., and the General
Pretreatment Regulations, being 40 CFR 403. The objectives of this subchapter
are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with the operation of the POTW;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will
pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise
be incompatible with the operation of the POTW;
      (3)   To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge
is maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal with the city's
selected method of sludge use and disposal, as may be authorized by and in full
compliance with applicable state and federal laws and regulations;
      (4)   To protect against damage to the POTW and to protect POTW personnel
who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment
and to protect the general public;
      (5)   To protect ambient air quality to the extent same may be affected
by industrial wastewater generation, pretreatment and/or discharge to the POTW;
      (6)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge from the POTW;
      (7)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the POTW; and
      (8)   To enable the city to comply with its TPDES Permit conditions,
sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to
which the POTW is subject.
   (B)   This subchapter shall apply to all industrial users of the POTW. The
subchapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; authorizes
monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; establishes administrative
review procedures; requires industrial user reporting; and provides for the
setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the
program established herein.
(Ord. 12-1994-59, passed 12-13-94; Am. Ord. 08-2003-32, passed 4-26-03; Am.
Ord. 02-2006-16, passed 2-28-06; Am. Ord. 04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
§ 51.071 ADMINISTRATION.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director of Public Works shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this subchapter. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the Director of Public Works may be delegated
by the Director of Public Works to other city personnel.
(Ord. 12-1994-59, passed 12-13-94; Am. Ord. 08-2003-32, passed 4-26-03; Am.
Ord. 02-2006-16, passed 2-28-06; Am. Ord. 04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
§ 51.072 DEFINITIONS; ABBREVIATIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean
Water Act, as amended, being 33 USC 1251 et seq.
      APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The TCEQ, which has been delegated National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System Authority and has an approved state pretreatment
program.
      AUTHORIZED or DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER. The
meaning is defined in 40 CFR § 403.12 (1)1-3 and includes:
         (1)   If the industrial user is a corporation, an authorized
representative shall mean:
            (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of
the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person
who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation;
            (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having
the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit
requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures”;
         (2)   If the industrial user is a partnership, or sole proprietorship,
an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or proprietor,
respectively;
         (3)   If the industrial user is a federal, state, or local
governmental facility, an authorized representative shall mean a director or
highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the government facility or his or her
designee;
         (4)   The individuals described in divisions (1) through (3) above may
designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the
written authorization is submitted to the city prior to the effective date of
such proposed designation.
      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). The schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in section 5-348 (a) and (b) and
40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs include treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. BMPs are only
applicable where required by categorical limits or categorical standards.
      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure,
five days at 20° Centigrade expressed in terms of mass and concentration of
milligrams per liter (mg/l).
      BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from other drainage pipes inside the walls
of the building and conveys the discharge to the building sewer, which begins
approximately three feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
      BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer
or other place of disposal.
      CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
      CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance
with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317(b) and (c)) which apply to
a specific category of industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, and as adopted by reference by TCEQ at 30
TAC Chapter 315.
      CITY. The City of Cleburne, Texas, or the City of Cleburne, Texas, as
represented by the City Council, the City Manager or any authorized person
acting in its behalf.
      CONTROL AUTHORITY. The city or the person designated by the city to be
responsible for the Industrial Pretreatment Program or his or her duly
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
      CONTROL MANHOLE. A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some
point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the
public sewer.
      DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT. The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant
during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of
mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the
day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the
daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant
concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
      DENTAL DISCHARGER. A facility where the practice of dentistry is
performed, including, but not limited to, institutions, permanent or temporary
offices, clinics, home offices, and facilities owned and operated by federal,
state or local governments, that discharges wastewater to a publicly owned
treatment works (POTW).
      DENTAL INDUSTRIAL USER (DIU). Industrial users subject to the
requirements of a dental discharger as promulgated by the U.S. EPA in
accordance with Section 441.10 and as adopted by reference by TCEQ at 30 TAC
Chapter 315.
      DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Director of Public Works of the city
(Director of Public Works) or his or her duly authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA). The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or other duly authorized official of said agency.
      EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation
of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard
is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act.
      GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable wastes and residue from the
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food; and from the handling,
processing, storage and sale of food products and produce.
      GRAB SAMPLE. An individual sample collected over a period of time not
exceeding 15 minutes.
      INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of (nondomestic)
pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section
307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
      INDUSTRIAL USER or USER. Any person that discharges industrial waste into
the sanitary sewer system and/or any source of indirect discharge.
      INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The solid, liquid, or gaseous waste resulting from any
process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business, or waste resulting from
the development of any natural resource, any mixture of the waste with waste or
domestic wastewater, or distinctly different than domestic wastewater, or any
other nondomestic wastewater source.
      INDUSTRIAL WASTE CHARGE. The charge made on those persons who discharge
industrial wastes into the POTW.
      INSTANTANEOUS DAILY MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT. The maximum daily
concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time,
determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected,
independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
      INTERFERENCE. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge
or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, and therefore
is a cause of a violation of the city's TPDES permit (including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge
use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory
provisions or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local
regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act
(SWDA), including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act;
the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and
Sanctuaries Act.
      LOCAL LIMITS or TECHNICALLY-BASED LOCAL LIMITS. Pretreatment standards
adopted by the city pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5 for wastewaters discharged to the
POTW that are designed to protect against pass through and interference.
      MAY. Permissive or discretionary.
      MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, foment, etiologic agents,
contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory
wastes and dialysis wastes.
      MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT. The highest allowable average of “daily
discharges” over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all “daily
discharges” measured during a calendar month divided by the number of “daily
discharges” measured during that month.
      NELAP. National Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Program developed
and adopted by the National Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Conference,
which was established by state and federal officials in 1995 as an
accreditation standards-setting organization for environmental laboratories.
      NEW SOURCE.
         (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under
Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided
that:
            (a)   The building, structure, facility or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located;
            (b)   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; and
            (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
         (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of Section (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
         (3)   Construction of a new source as defined under this division has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
            (a)   Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite
construction program:
               1.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
               2.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
            (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the
purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can
be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation under this definition.
      NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material intermediate product, waste product, or
finished product.
      NON-SIGNIFICANT CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER. An industrial user that
never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical
wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the
conditions specified in 40 CFR Part 403.3 (v) 2-3 are met.
      PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into "waters of the U.S.",
as that term is defined in the Act, in quantities or concentrations which,
alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's TPDES permit (including
an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state or local governmental
entities.
      pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in
standard units (S.U.).
      POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, industrial
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and the characteristics of the wastewater [e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), toxicity, odor].
      PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination
of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, by process changes, or by other means, except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless dilution is allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pre-treatment imposed on an industrial user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
      PRETREATMENT STANDARD or STANDARDS. Prohibitive discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards, and/or local limits.
      PROCESS WASTEWATER. Any water which, during manufacturing or processing,
comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw
material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or waste product.
      PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Absolute
prohibitions against discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear
in §
51.073 of this subchapter.
      PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The garbage wastes that have been shredded to
such a degree that all particles shall be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particles greater than
one-half inch in any dimension.
      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A "treatment works" as defined by
Section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), which is owned by the state or
municipality. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the
collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or
industrial wastes and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment
plant. The term also means the municipal entity having jurisdiction over the
industrial users and responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the
treatment works.
      SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
      SEWAGE. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations, and the like).
      SHALL. Mandatory.
      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU). Industrial users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N; and any other industrial user that discharges an average of
25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater, contributes a process waste stream
which makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic
capacity of the POTW's wastewater treatment plant, or is designated as
significant by the city on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirements (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)).
      SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC). The Superintendent shall publish
annually (in April), in a newspaper of general circulation that provides
meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the city, a list of
the industrial users which, at any time during the previous 12 months, were in
significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements.
         For the purposes of this provision, a significant industrial user is
in significant noncompliance if it meets one or more of the criteria outlined
in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(viii), or in §
51.080(B). These are:
         (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here
as those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-
month period on rolling quarters exceed the daily maximum limit or average
limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount, or exceed any other
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as
defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l).;
         (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant
parameter during a six-month period on rolling quarters equals or exceeds the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit, or exceed any numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(L), multiplied
by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2
for all other pollutants except pH);
         (3)   Any other discharge violation or violation of a pretreatment
standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long term
average, instantaneous limits, or narrative standard), that the city POTW
believes determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass through (including endangering the health of city
personnel or the general public);
         (4)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's
exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or
prevent such a discharge;
         (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
         (6)   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
         (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
         (8)   Any other violation(s) or series of violations which the city
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the city's
industrial pretreatment program, which may include numeric limits,
instantaneous limits, narrative standards such as operational standards or
narrative limits, and enforceable violations of best management practices, if
applicable.
            Rolling quarterly assessment. In determining whether an industrial
user is significantly noncompliant pursuant to divisions (B)(1) and (2), the
city will evaluate six months of prior water quality data, using four rolling
quarters that correlate with the city's pretreatment program year.
      SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE. Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in §
51.073 or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not
limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a
reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way
violate the POTW’s regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE. A classification pursuant
to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the U.S. Office of
Management and Budget.
      STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting therefrom, including snowmelt.
      SUPERINTENDENT. The water and wastewater superintendent of the city
(Superintendent of Water Utilities) or his or her duly authorized deputy,
agent, or representative. The Superintendent is the Industrial Pretreatment
Program Coordinator for the city.
      TEXAS COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY or TCEQ. The Texas Commission
on Environmental Quality, or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a
designation for any state regulatory entity that issues operating or discharge
permits city or takes enforcement action affecting the city.
      TOTAL DISSOLVED SOLIDS (TDS). The total dissolved minerals in water,
wastewater, or other liquid, and which is not removable by laboratory
filtering.
      TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). The total suspended matter that floats on
the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.
      TOXIC POLLUTANT. One of the pollutants, or combination of pollutants,
listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provision of
Section 307 of the Act (33 USC 1317).
      TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT. Any discharge of treated wastewater from the
POTW into "waters in the state," as that term is defined in Tex. Water Code
Chapter 26.
      UNPOLLUTED WATER or WASTE. Any water or waste containing none of the
following: emulsified grease or oil; acids or alkalis; phenols or other
substances imparting taste and odor in the receiving water; toxic or poisonous
substances in suspension, colloidal state of solution and noxious or otherwise
obnoxious gases. It shall contain not more than 10 parts per million each of
suspended solids and BOD. The color shall not exceed 50 color units.
      WASTEWATER. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes, and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
      WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the POTW
designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial waste.
   (B)   Singular and plural terms. The use of the singular shall be construed
to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by
the context of its use.
   (C)   Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
      BOD      Biochemical Oxygen Demand
      CA      Control Authority
      CFR      Code of Federal Register
      COD      Chemical Oxygen Demand
      EPA      U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
      gpd      Gallons Per Day
      IU      Industrial User
      l      Liter
      mg      Milligrams
      mg/l      Milligrams per liter
      NPDES   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
      NSCIU   Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User
      O&M      Operation and Maintenance
      POTW      Publicly Owned Treatment Works
      RCRA      Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
      TAC      Texas Administrative Code
      TBLL      Technically Based Local Limits
      TCEQ      Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
      TDS      Total Dissolved Solids
      TPDES   Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
      SIC      Standard Industrial Classifications
      SIU      Significant Industrial User
      SNC      Significant Noncompliance
      SWDA      Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.)
      TSS      Total Suspended Solids
      USC      United States Code
(Ord. 12-1994-59, passed 12-13-94; Am. Ord. 08-2003-32, passed 4-26-03; Am.
Ord. 02-2006-16, passed 2-28-06; Am. Ord. 04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
§ 51.073 GENERAL SEWER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Prohibited discharge standards. No industrial user shall introduce or
cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes
or contributes to pass through or interference. These general prohibitions
apply to all industrial users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to
categorical pretreatment standards or any other federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirement. Furthermore, no industrial user may
contribute the following pollutants, substances or wastewater to the POTW:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the municipal
wastewater collection and POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams
with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
      (2)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 11.0, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment, or
endangering city personnel.
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference with proper operation of the
POTW, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
sawdust, metal, glass, glue, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, slops,
chemical residues, paint residues, bulk solids, and paper products, either
whole or ground by garbage grinder.
      (4)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding
pollutants (BOD and the like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or
pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with either the POTW or any wastewater
treatment or sludge process, or which will constitute a hazard to humans or
animals.
      (5)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65°C), or
which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C).
      (6)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral
oil origin, gasoline, benzene, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
      (7)   Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems.
      (8)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the city in accordance with §§
51.074 and
51.101.
      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life, or to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
      (10)   Any garbage that has not been properly comminuted or shredded. If
properly comminuted or shredded, then it may be accepted under provisions
established in §
51.072(A) under the definition of “properly shredded garbage”.
      (11)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes
except as specifically approved by the Superintendent in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
      (12)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact
cooling water, and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically
authorized by the Superintendent.
      (13)   Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment
of industrial wastes.
      (14)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
Superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit.
      (15)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant's effluent to fail a
toxicity test, violate its NPDES, TPDES, or TCEQ permit or create a hazard in
the receiving waters.
      (16)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other
substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW or in discharges from
the POTW.
      (17)   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's
effluent thereby violating the city's TPDES permit.
      (18)   Any wastes or wastewater that may deposit grease or oil in the
sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers, overload skimming and
grease handling equipment, pass to the receiving waters without being
effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the
nonamenability of the substances to bacterial action, or deleteriously affect
the POTW treatment processes.
      (19)   Any waste or wastes not identified in the city's application for a
wastewater discharge permit that the city has not specifically authorized for
discharge.
   (B)   Discharge prohibited. Wastes prohibited by division (A) of this
section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW. All floor drains located in process or materials
storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility
before connecting with the POTW.
   (C)   National categorical pretreatment standards. The national categorical
pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405
through 471 are hereby incorporated by reference and shall be treated as if set
forth in full herein.
      (1)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
Superintendent may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
      (2)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Superintendent
shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40
CFR 403.6(e).
   (D)   State pretreatment standards. TCEQ's pretreatment regulations for
existing and new sources of pollution, found at 30 TAC Chapter 315, which adopt
by reference certain portions of 40 CFR 403, are hereby incorporated by
reference and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein.
   (E)   Specific pollutant limitations or local limits.
      (1)   The following pollutant limits are established to protect against
pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing
in excess of the following instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits:
         Pollutants            Limits, mg/l
         Arsenic            0.059
         Oil and Grease         200
         Cadmium            0.056
         Chromium (Hex)         0.146
         Copper            1.770
         Cyanide (Total)         0.117
         Lead               0.307
         Mercury            0.001
         Nickel               0.438
         Pollutants            Limits, mg/l
         pH               5.5-11 standard units
         Silver               0.131
         Zinc               0.719
      (2)   The city will set limits on a permit by permit basis for Chromium
(total). These limits are provided in Subpart F of the Standard Operating
Procedures and Table 2 and 10 of the most current local limits. The city will
provide notice and an opportunity to comment on local limits to industrial
users and the public, pursuant to 40 CFR 403.11.
      (3)   The city will set limits on a permit by permit basis for TDS. These
limits are provided in Subpart F of the Standard Operating Procedures and Table
6 of the most current local limits. The city will provide notice and an
opportunity to comment on local limits for TDS to industrial users and the
public, pursuant to 40 CFR 403.11.
      (4)   Concentrations apply at the point where the industrial waste is
discharged to the POTW (end of pipe).
      (5)   Mass limitations for SIUs. The Superintendent may impose mass
limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations
above. When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed
only in terms of pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request that
the city convert the limits to equivalent mass limits. The determination to
convert concentration limits to mass limits shall be determined with the
discretion of the city. The city may establish equivalent mass limits only if
the industrial user meets all the following conditions in 40 CFR § 403.6 (c)(5)
(i) and is subject to the conditions described on (c)(5)(ii) of the same
section.
      (6)   Concentration limits for categorical SIUs. The city may convert the
mass limits of the categorical pretreatment standards at 40 CFR parts 414, 419,
and 455 to concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations
applicable to individual industrial users under the conditions described in 40
CFR § 403.6(c)(6). When converting such limits to concentration limits, the
city shall use the concentrations listed in the applicable subparts of 40 CFR
parts 414, 419, and 455 and document that dilution is not being substituted for
treatment as prohibited by 40 CFR § 403.6 (d).
   (F)   City's right of revision. The city reserves the right to establish, by
ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or
requirements on discharges to the POTW if deemed necessary to comply with the
objectives presented in §
51.070 or the general and specific prohibitions in divisions (A) and (B) of
this section.
   (G)   Special agreement.
      (1)   The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with
industrial users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to
the POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement. However, the industrial user may request
a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR
403.15. They may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment
standard from EPA.
      (2)   Such a request will be approved only if the industrial user can
prove that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from
the factors considered by EPA when establishing that pretreatment standard. An
industrial user requesting a fundamentally different factor variance must
comply with the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13.
   (H)   Dilution. No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process
water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, unless expressly authorized
by the city pursuant to an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The
Superintendent may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other
cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
   (I)   Best management practices. The city may develop best management
practices (BMPs), by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits,
to implement Local Limits and the requirements of section §
51.073(A). BMPs that are enforceable pretreatment standards are required to
include the following: categorical standards that have BMPs (or pollution
prevention alternative) and/or local limits and/or other pretreatment
standards, if applicable. The city shall notify and submit a request to modify
its approved program to the Approval Authority, any new BMPs prior to
implementation.
   (J)   Non-significant categorical industrial user. City may develop and
issue permits for NSCIUs.
(Ord. 12-1994-59, passed 12-13-94; Am. Ord. 08-2003-32, passed 4-26-03; Am.
Ord. 02-2006-16, passed 2-28-06; Am. Ord. 04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
§ 51.074 PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Pretreatment facilities.
      (1)   Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as
required to comply with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits
and the prohibitions set out in §
51.073 above within the time limitations specified by the EPA, TCEQ, or the
Superintendent, whichever is more stringent, if applicable. Any facilities
required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed
plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be
submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before
construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures
will in no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying
the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the city under
the provisions of this subchapter. The city shall require the industrial user
to verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will
receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations,
subchapters, rules and orders of federal, state and local government.
      (2)   Industrial users responsible for discharges through a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his or her own expense and as
required by the city, install an accessible and safely located control manhole,
install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation sampling and
measurement of the waste, and maintain the equipment and facilities.
   (B)   Additional pretreatment measures.
      (1)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Superintendent may require
industrial users to control the quantities and rates of discharge during peak
flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into
specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate
sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, require pretreatment of
unacceptable discharges, require payment to cover the cost of handling and
treating wastes, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the
POTW and determine the industrial user's compliance with the requirements of
this subchapter.
      (2)   The city has the authority to reject and refuse discharges or
proposed discharges from the industrial users. If discharges or proposed
discharges to the public sewer system may deleteriously affect wastewater
facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, create a hazard to life
or health, or create a public nuisance, the city will refuse acceptance of the
waste.
      (3)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be required when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes
or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for residential users. All interceptors shall be of type and capacity
approved by the Superintendent and shall be so located to be easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be installed, inspected,
cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the owner at his or her expense.
   (C)   Accidental discharge/slug control plans.
      (1)   The Superintendent may require any industrial user to develop and
implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The city will evaluate the
SIU, within one year of being designated an SIU, to determine whether such SIU
needs a plan or other action to control slug discharges (40 CFR § 403.8(f)(2)
(vi)). The city shall keep records of the activities associated with slug
control evaluation, and results of such activities are required to be available
to the city upon request. The city shall also keep records of all information
resulting from any monitoring activities required by 40 CFR Part 403, including
documentation associated with BMPs. Any industrial user required to develop and
implement an accidental discharge/control slug plan shall submit a plan which
addresses, at a minimum, the following:
         (a)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges.
         (b)   Description of stored chemicals.
         (c)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental
or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which
would violate any of the prohibited discharges in §
51.073.
         (d)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment for emergency response.
      (2)   The Superintendent shall regulate the flow and concentration of
slug loads when they may:
         (a)   Impair the treatment process, or cause interference or pass
through;
         (b)   Cause damage to collection facilities;
         (c)   Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or
         (d)   Render the treated wastewater unfit for stream discharge or
reuse.
   (D)   Tenant responsibility. Where an owner of property leases premises to
any other person as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement, if either the
owner or the tenant is an industrial user, either or both may be held
responsible for compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (E)   Vandalism. No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any
structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any person
found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set
out in §§
51.081 through
51.083.
   (F)   Fraud and false statements. No user may in any way falsify statements
or provide fraudulent information to the city. Any user that knowingly makes
any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application,
record, report, plan or other communication or documentation filed, or required
to be provided, performed or maintained, pursuant to this subchapter,
wastewater discharge permit or order, or who falsifies, tampers with or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this subchapter shall be subject to the provisions of 40 CFR 403.12(n) and
penalties stipulated in §§
51.081 through
51.083.
(Ord. 12-1994-59, passed 12-13-94; Am. Ord. 08-2003-32, passed 4-26-03; Am.
Ord. 02-2006-16, passed 2-28-06; Am. Ord. 04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
§ 51.075 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   Wastewater survey. When requested by the Superintendent, all
industrial users must submit information on the nature and characteristics of
their wastewater by completing a wastewater survey prior to commencing their
discharge. The Superintendent is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose
and may periodically require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to
complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the
industrial user and shall be considered a violation of the subchapter.
   (B)   Wastewater discharge permit requirement.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user to
discharge wastewater into the city's POTW without first obtaining a wastewater
discharge permit from the Superintendent. Any violation of the terms and
conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this
subchapter and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set
out in §§
51.081 through
51.083. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of
its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or
requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law.
      (2)   The Superintendent may require other industrial users, including
liquid waste haulers, to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to
carry out the purposes of this subchapter.
   (C)   Wastewater discharge permitting - existing connections. Any
significant industrial user which discharges industrial waste into the POTW
prior to the effective date of this subchapter and which wishes to continue
such discharges in the future, shall, within 120 days after said date, apply to
the city for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with this section, and
shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 120 days of
the effective date of this subchapter except in accordance with a wastewater
discharge permit issued by the Superintendent.
   (D)   Wastewater discharge permitting - new connections. Any significant
industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging industrial wastes
into the POTW must obtain a wastewater discharge permit prior to the beginning
or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge
permit must be filed at least 120 days prior to the date upon which any
discharge will begin.
   (E)   Extrajurisdictional industrial users. The city does not extend sewage
lines outside of the City of Cleburne Certificate of Convenience and Necessity
(CCN) service area or accept hauled wastes from sources outside of the CCN.
Therefore, the city will not accept permit requests from potential industrial
users outside of the CCN. Customers within the CCN that receive wastewater
service will enter the city’s customer service agreement and where applicable
an industrial user wastewater discharge permit.
   (F)   Wastewater discharge permit application contents.
      (1)   In order to be considered for a wastewater discharge permit, all
industrial users required to have a wastewater discharge permit must submit the
information required by this subchapter. The Superintendent shall approve a
form to be used as a permit application. In addition, the following information
may be requested:
         (a)   Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on
the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or
stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be,
discharged to the POTW.
         (b)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed
or actual hours of discharge to the POTW.
         (c)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processed, and
rate of production, and the process waste stream(s) to be discharged to the
POTW.
         (d)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day).
         (e)   The site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location,
and elevation, and all points of discharge.
         (f)   Time and duration of the discharge.
         (g)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Superintendent to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
         (h)   Pursuant to 33 U.S.C.A. 1318(a), consent for the Superintendent
or any other duly authorized person to have access to records or right of entry
to the property of the applicant.
      (2)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and
will be returned to the industrial user for revision.
   (G)   Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge
permit applications, industrial user reports, correspondence and documents of
any kind submitted to the city, shall contain the following certification
statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user:
“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.”
   (H)   Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The Superintendent will
evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require additional
information. Within 120 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge
permit application, the Superintendent will determine whether or not to issue a
wastewater discharge permit. If no determination is made within this time
period, the application will be deemed denied. The Superintendent may deny any
application for a wastewater discharge permit.
   (I)   Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit. The Superintendent may grant
a wastewater discharge permit to discharge industrial wastewater to the POTW to
an industrial user meeting all requirements of this subchapter provided that
the industrial user:
      (1)   Submits an application 120 days before the anticipated discharge
date on forms supplied by the Superintendent;
      (2)   At the Superintendent's request, submits for approval of all plans
and specifications for pretreatment facilities.
      (3)   Submits to an inspection of production and pretreatment facilities
by the Superintendent.
      (4)   Comply with all requirements for agreements or arrangements
including, but not limited to, provisions for:
         (a)   Payment of charges;
         (b)   Installation and operation of pretreatment facilities;
         (c)   Sampling and analysis (baseline monitoring report) to determine
quantity and strength of wastewater; and
         (d)   Reporting to the Superintendent at frequencies specified in the
wastewater discharge permit.
      (5)   Provide a sampling point subject to the provisions of this
subchapter for approval of the Superintendent.
      (6)   Secure a wastewater discharge permit prior to discharging any
waste. Failure to obtain a permit before discharging will result in enforcement
action.
   (J)   Denial or conditioning permits of new or increased contributions. In
accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(i), the city may deny permits or condition
permits of new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the
nature of pollutants, to the POTW by industrial users where such contributions
do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such
contributions would cause the POTW to violate its TPDES permit.
(Ord. 12-1994-59, passed 12-13-94; Am. Ord. 08-2003-32, passed 4-26-03; Am.
Ord. 02-2006-16, passed 2-28-06; Am. Ord. 04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
§ 51.076 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS.
   (A)   Wastewater discharge permit duration. Wastewater discharge permits
shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at
the discretion of the Superintendent. Each wastewater discharge permit will
indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
   (B)   Wastewater discharge permit contents. Wastewater discharge permits
shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the
Superintendent to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of
the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health
and safety, protect general public health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, protect ambient air quality, protect against damage to
the POTW, and ensure the city's capability to produce reclaimed water for
reuse.
      (1)   Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following conditions:
         (a)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration,
which in no event shall exceed five years;
         (b)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to and approval from the city, and
provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing
wastewater discharge permit;
         (c)   Effluent limits applicable to the user based on applicable
standards in federal, state and local law;
         (d)   Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample
type based on federal, state and local law;
         (e)   Statement of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative
penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law;
         (f)   Effluent limits, including any required best management
practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards;
         (g)   Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants (or any required best management practice) to be monitored, sampling
location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and
local law, if applicable.
         (h)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law.
         (i)   Requirements to control slug discharge, if necessary.
         (j)   The process for seeking a waiver for monitoring a pollutant
neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in accordance with
§
51.077(D)(5), if applicable.
      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited
to, the following:
         (a)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
         (b)   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or
maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater
pollutants or properties;
         (c)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate, or to prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
         (d)   Development and implementation of spill control plans or other
special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately
prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges;
         (e)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
         (f)   The unit charge or schedule of industrial user charges and fees
for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
         (g)   Requirements for the installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities and equipment;
         (h)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and/or
         (i)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Superintendent to
ensure compliance with this subchapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
   (C)   Wastewater discharge permit appeals. Any person, including the
industrial user, may petition the city to reconsider the terms of a wastewater
discharge permit within 30 days of its issuance.
      (1)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to
be a waiver of the administrative appeal.
      (2)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and
the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
      (3)   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
      (4)   If the city fails to act within 120 days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not
to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final
administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
      (5)   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final
administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the District Court for Johnson County within two years.
   (D)   Wastewater discharge permit modification.
      (1)   The Superintendent may modify a wastewater discharge permit for
good cause including, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
         (b)   To address significant alterations or additions to the
industrial user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since
the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;
         (c)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
         (d)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a
threat to the city's POTW, personnel, or the receiving waters;
         (e)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
         (f)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required
reporting;
         (g)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
         (h)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit; and/or
         (i)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation
to a new owner/operator.
      (2)   The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge
permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit condition.
   (E)   Wastewater discharge permit transfer.
      (1)   Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a
new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least 120 days advance
notice to the Superintendent and the Superintendent approves the wastewater
discharge permit transfer. The notice to the Superintendent must include a
written certification by the new owner and/or operator which:
         (a)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate
intent to change the facility's operations and processes;
         (b)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
and
         (c)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
      (2)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the
wastewater discharge permit voidable on the date of facility transfer.
   (F)   Wastewater discharge permit revocation.
      (1)   Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following
reasons:
         (a)   Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
         (b)   Failure to provide prior notification to the city of changed
conditions;
         (c)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;
         (d)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
         (e)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
         (f)   Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility
premises and records;
         (g)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
         (h)   Failure to pay fines;
         (i)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
         (j)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
         (k)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
         (l)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted
facility; and/or
         (m)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or pretreatment
requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this
subchapter.
      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon nonuse,
cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater
discharge permits are void upon the issuance of a new or amended wastewater
discharge permit by the city.
   (G)   Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A significant industrial user
shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete
wastewater discharge permit application a minimum of 120 days prior to the
expiration of the industrial user's existing wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 12-1994-59, passed 12-13-94; Am. Ord. 08-2003-32, passed 4-26-03; Am.
Ord. 02-2006-16, passed 2-28-06; Am. Ord. 04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
§ 51.077 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Baseline monitoring report.
      (1)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
significant industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment
standards, and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW,
shall be required to submit to the city a report which contains the information
listed in division (B) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement
of a proposed discharge, new sources, and sources that become significant
industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall be required to submit to the city a report which contains the
information listed in division (A)(2) of this section. A new source shall also
be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet
applicable pretreatment standards. A new source shall also give estimates of
its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.
      (2)   The industrial user shall submit the information required by this
section including:
         (a)   Identifying information. The name and address of the facility
including the name of the operator and owners.
         (b)   Wastewater discharge permits. A list of any environmental
control wastewater discharge permits held by or for the facility.
         (c)   Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such industrial user. This description should
include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the
POTW from regulated processes.
         (d)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured averaged
daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated
process streams and other streams; as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestreams formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6.
         (e)   Measurement of pollutants.
            1.   Information concerning the categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process.
            2.   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature
and concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the city)
of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations (or mass,
where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
division (J) of this section. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires
compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention (P2) alternative, the user shall
submit documentation as required by the CA or applicable standards to determine
compliance with the standard.
            3.   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set
out in division (K) of this section.
         (f)   Certification. A statement reviewed by the industrial user's
authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating
whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
         (g)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which
the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. To assess and assure
compliance, the SIU must submit compliance schedule progress reports. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out
in division (B) of this section.
         (h)   All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with §
51.075.
   (B)   Compliance schedule progress report. The following conditions shall
apply to the schedule required by subdivision (A)(2)(g) of this section. The
schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major
components, commencing and completing construction, beginning and conducting
routine operation). No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.
The industrial user shall submit a progress report to the Superintendent no
later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule. In no
event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the
Superintendent.
   (C)   Compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline report.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial
user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the city a report containing the information described in subdivisions (A)(2)
(d) through (f). For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the industrial
user's long term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report
shall include the industrial user's actual production during the appropriate
sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with §
51.075(G).
   (D)   Periodic compliance reports.
      (1)   Any significant user or significant industrial user subject to a
pretreatment standard shall, at a frequency determined by the Superintendent
but in no case less than twice per year (except for IUs which fall under the
NSCIU category or qualify for a monitoring waiver or reduced monitoring per 40
CFR §§ 403.3(v)(2), 403.8(f)(2)(v), 403.12 (e)(1), (2) and (3)), submit a
report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by such pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated
average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the
pretreatment standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention
(P2) alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the CA or
applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard. All periodic
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §
51.075(G).
      (2)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial
user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall
be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times at the expense of the permit holder. The failure of an industrial user to
keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the
industrial user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its
discharge.
      (3)   If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in and
of this section monitors any pollutant at the identified sampling location more
frequently than required by the POTW by using the procedures prescribed in
division (K) of this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included
in the report.
      (4)   If approved by the city, the industrial user may submit electronic
reports, however the user must submit hard copies of the documents within five
working days.
      (5)   Waiver of pollutant sampling.
         (a)   The city may authorize an industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated
by a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated,
through sampling and other technical factors, that the pollutant is neither
present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or, if present, is only
present at background levels from intake water, without any increase in the
pollutant due to activities of the industrial user.
         (b)   The authorization is subject to the following conditions:
            1.   The pollutant is determined to be present solely due to
sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility, provided that the sanitary
wastewater: is not regulated by an applicable categorical standard; and cm
includes no process wastewater.
            2.   The waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective
period of the individual wastewater discharge permit, but in no case longer
than five years. The industrial user must submit a new request for a waiver
when a subsequent individual wastewater discharge permit is granted.
            3.   The industrial user must provide data from at least one
sampling of the facility's process wastewater prior to any treatment present at
the facility. The process wastewater sample must be representative of
wastewater from all processes.
            4.   The request for a waiver must be signed in accordance with §
51.072(A), under the definition of “authorized or duly authorized
representative of the industrial user,” and include the certification statement
in §
51.075(G).
            5.   Non-detectable sample results may be used as a demonstration
that a pollutant is not present if the EPA-approved method from Title 40, Code
of Federal Regulations, Part 136, as amended, with the lowest minimum detection
level for that pollutant was used in the analysis.
            6.   Any waiver by the Superintendent must be included as a
condition in the industrial user's permit. The reasons supporting the waiver
and any information submitted by the industrial user in its request for the
waiver must be maintained by the Superintendent for a period of three years
after the expiration of the waiver.
            7.   The industrial user must certify that there has been no
increase of the pollutant in its wastestream due to its activities. The
certification must appear on all future reports, along with the statement in
Section 49-5ICm).
            8.   If a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to
be present because of changes occurring in the industrial user's operations,
the industrial user must immediately comply with the sampling requirements of §
51.077(D)(1) or other more frequent sampling requirements imposed by the
Superintendent; and notify the Superintendent.
            9.   This division does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as
otherwise provided in the categorical pretreatment standards.
   (E)   Report of changed conditions. Each industrial user is required to
notify the Superintendent of any planned significant changes to the industrial
user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of
its wastewater at least 120 days before the change.
      (1)   The Superintendent may require the industrial user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under §
51.075(F).
      (2)   The Superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit under §
51.075(H) or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under §
51.076(D).
      (3)   No industrial user shall implement the planned changed condition(s)
until and unless the Superintendent has responded to the industrial user's
notice.
      (4)   For purposes of this requirement flow increases of 10% or greater,
and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, shall be deemed
significant.
      (5)   Notification is required in advance of any substantial change in
the volume or character of pollutant in the discharge, including listed or
hazardous wastes for which the IU has submitted initial notification under 40
CFR 403.12(p).
      (6)   Notification is required for any discharge of hazardous waste in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(p) and §
51.077(I).
   (F)   Report of potential problems.
      (1)   In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of non-routine, episodic nature, a non-
customary batch discharge, a slug discharge, or a slug load which may cause or
have the potential to cause problems for the POTW (including a violation of the
prohibited discharge, discharge standards in §
51.073(A)), it is the responsibility of the industrial user to immediately
telephone and notify the Superintendent of the incident. This notification
shall include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the industrial user.
      (2)   Within five days following such discharge, the industrial user
shall, unless waived by the Superintendent, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall
not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or other
liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural
resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such
notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties, or
other liability which may be imposed by the Superintendent or the city pursuant
to this subchapter.
      (3)   Failure to notify the city of discharges or potential discharges
that may cause interference or pass through, damage the POTW, or pose a threat
to POTW worker safety, or a threat to the general public, shall be deemed a
separate violation of this subchapter.
      (4)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the
event of a discharge described in division (F)(1) of this section. Employers
shall ensure that all employees, who may cause or suffer such a discharge to
occur, are advised of emergency notification procedure.
      (5)   SIUs are required to notify the Superintendent immediately of any
changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge.
   (G)   Reports from nonsignificant industrial users.
      (1)   All industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment
standards and not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the city as the Superintendent may require.
      (2)   Reports from non-significant categorical industrial users. All
NSCIUs pursuant to 40 CFR § 403.3(v)(2) shall annually submit the following
certification statement to the Superintendent, signed in accordance with the
signatory requirements in paragraph § 403.3(l). This certification must
accompany any alternative report required by the city:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR ____, I
certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period
from ________ ____, to ________, ____ [month, days, year]:
(a)   The facility described as ________ [facility name] met the definition of
a non-significant categorical Industrial User as described in § 403.3(v)(2);
(b) the facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards and
requirements during this reporting period; and (c) the facility never
discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given
day during this reporting period. This compliance certification is based upon
the following information:
                                                                                                                           
   (H)   Notice of violation, repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling
performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the industrial user must
notify the Superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to the Superintendent within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user is not required to
resample if the POTW performs monitoring at the industrial user's facility or
plant at least once a month, or if the POTW performs sampling between the time
of the industrial user's initial sampling and the time when the industrial user
receives the results of this sampling, or if the POTW has performed the
sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user.
   (I)   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.
      (1)   Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste
shall notify the POTW, EPA, and TCEQ authorities in writing of any discharge
into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of
the hazardous waste set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number,
and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the industrial user
proposed to discharge more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month
to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to
the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial
user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes,
an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste
stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of
constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following
12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the
discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted
only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of
changed discharges must be submitted under division (E) of this section. The
notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already
reported under the self-monitoring requirements of §
51.073(A), (C), and (D).
      (2)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division (I)(1) of
this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15
kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity
of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e),
requires a one-time predischarge notification. Subsequent months during which
the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste
do not require additional notification.
      (3)   In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the POTW, the
EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and TCEQ authorities of the
discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such
regulations.
      (4)   In the case of any notification made under this division, the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical.
   (J)   Analytical requirements.
      (1)   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be
submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall
be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and
amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA and TCEQ.
      (2)   The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to collect
and analyze samples for which the city is responsible for under this
subchapter.
      (3)   The city has the authority to reject data from laboratories which
do not have adequate quality assurance and/or quality control procedures. Data
submitted in monitoring reports to the city must be legally defensible.
   (K)   Sample collection.
      (1)   Except as indicated in divisions (2) and (3) below, the user must
collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling
techniques, or time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is
authorized by the Superintendent in the permit. Note: Daily discharge is
required to be defined as “the discharge of a pollutant” measured during a
calendar day or any 24-hour period that reasonably represents the calendar day
for purposes of sampling. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab
sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must be representative of the
discharge. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing
procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by
POTW, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show
compliance with instantaneous limits, if applicable.
      (2)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
      (3)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day
compliance reports required in §
51.077 (A) and (C) and 40 CFR § 403.12(b) and (d), a minimum of four grab
samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide
and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling
data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are
available, the Superintendent may authorize a lower minimum. Sampling
requirements, which previously only applied to BMRs and 90-day reports, extend
to reports on continued compliance and noncategorical SIU reports (40 CFR
§403.12(g)(1) and (3)). For the reports required by paragraphs in §
51.077(D) and 40 CFR § 403.12(e) and § 403.12(h)), the industrial user is
required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure
compliance by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The city
may require that more than four grab samples be taken and separately analyzed
to ensure that sampling is representative (where the city cannot verify that
previous techniques were representative, such data will not support the use of
this alternative practice). Where there is a change to existing IU operation,
(for example, the addition of treatment) historic data that does not represent
the current discharge will not be able to be used to justify a lower minimum of
grab samples.
      (4)   Non-detectable sample results. Non-detectable sample results may be
used only as a demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA
approved method from 40 CFR Part 136 with the lowest minimum detection level
for that pollutant was used in the analysis.
      (5)   Where the city has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of
the industrial user, then the city shall perform the repeat sampling and
analysis. If the city notifies the industrial user of the violation and
requires the industrial user of the violation and requires the industrial user
to perform repeat sampling and analysis then submission of the results are due
within a 30 day time frame. Resampling is not required if the following are
performed: (1) the city performs the sampling at the IU at a frequency of at
least once per month or (2) the city performs sampling at the IU between the
time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the IU or the
city receives the results of this sampling [40 CFR §403.12(g)(2)].
      (6)   Sampling must be taken within a 24-hour period, however, the sample
should only be collected during the portion of the 24-hour period that the IU
is discharging from the regulated process and/or pretreatment unit (as long as
regulated process wastewater is flowing through the pretreatment unit). During
parts of the day when there is no discharge of process wastewater, standing
water shall not be disproportionately sampled and analyzed as it would not be
representative of the discharge from the IU. The city shall only approve a
sampling protocol that produces representative results and is based on
(operation conditions and physical configuration of the IU facility). The city
shall require documentation of site-specific circumstances prior to allowing
alternate sampling by including the alternate sampling in the IU control
mechanism. The city shall require documentation of how alternate sampling
techniques are representative of the discharge.
   (L)   Determination of noncompliance. The Superintendent may use a grab
sample(s) to determine noncompliance with pretreatment standards.
   (M)   Timing for submitted reports. Written reports will be deemed to have
been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed,
postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the U.S. Postal Service, the
date of receipt of report shall govern.
   (N)   Record keeping.
      (1)   Any industrial user subject to reporting requirements established
in this subchapter shall maintain records of all information resulting from any
monitoring activities required by this subchapter, any additional records of
information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user
independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with BMPs
established under § 51.073. Such records shall include for all samples:
         (a)   The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the
names of the person or persons taking the samples;
         (b)   Dates analyses were performed;
         (c)   Who performed the analyses;
         (d)   The analytical techniques/methods used; and
         (e)   The results of such analyses.
      (2)   Industrial users shall retain, and make available for inspection
and copying, all records and information required to be retained under this
subchapter. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three
years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any
litigation concerning compliance with this subchapter, or where the industrial
user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the
Superintendent.
(Ord. 12-1994-59, passed 12-13-94; Am. Ord. 08-2003-32, passed 4-26-03; Am.
Ord. 02-2006-16, passed 2-28-06; Am. Ord. 04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
§ 51.078 COMPLIANCE MONITORING.
   (A)   Inspection and sampling. The city shall have the right to enter 24
hours/day the sampling facilities of any industrial user to ascertain whether
the purpose of this subchapter, and any permit or order issued hereunder, is
being met and whether the industrial user is complying with all requirements
thereof. Industrial users shall allow the Superintendent or his representatives
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
independent sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of
any additional duties. All significant industrial users will be subject to
annual inspections in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v).
      (1)   Where an industrial user has security measures in force which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city,
TCEQ and EPA will be permitted to enter without delay, for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities.
      (2)   Pursuant to 33 U.S.C.A. 1318(a), the city, TCEQ and EPA shall have
the right to enter upon the industrial user's property for inspections,
sampling or metering, and/or require installation of such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
      (3)   The city may require the industrial user to install monitoring
equipment as it deems necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the industrial user at its sole expense. All other devices used to
measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated annually to ensure
their accuracy, unless the need for more frequent calibration is indicated.
      (4)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the industrial facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the
Superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access
shall be borne by the industrial user.
      (5)   Unreasonable delays in allowing city personnel access to the
industrial user's premises shall be a violation of this subchapter.
      (6)   Anyone acting under the authority of this section shall observe the
industrial user's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security,
and fire protection.
      (7)   Except when caused by negligence or failure of the industrial user
to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the industrial user
against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability
claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
industrial user and resulting from the city's sampling operation.
      (8)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized persons of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the purpose
of:
         (a)   Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, or repair;
         (b)   Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within
the easements; and
         (c)   Conducting any other authorized activity.
   (B)   Search warrants. If the Superintendent, or any other duly authorized
person, including a state and federal representative, has been refused access
to a building, structure or property or any part thereof, and if the
Superintendent has demonstrated probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this subchapter or that there is need to inspect as part of a
routine inspection program of the city designed to verify compliance with the
requirements and provisions of this subchapter or any permit or order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the
community, then upon application by the City Attorney, the Municipal Court
Judge of the city or other magistrate may issue a search and/or seizure warrant
describing therein the specific location subject to the warrant. The warrant
shall specify what, if anything, may be searched and/or seized on the property
described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the
Superintendent in the company of a uniformed police officer of the city. In the
event of an emergency affecting public health and safety, inspections shall be
made without the issuance of a warrant.
(Ord. 12-1994-59, passed 12-13-94; Am. Ord. 08-2003-32, passed 4-26-03; Am.
Ord. 02-2006-16, passed 2-28-06; Am. Ord. 04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
§ 51.079 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Information and data related to an industrial user that is included in
reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater
discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from city inspection and
sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction
unless the industrial user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the city, that the release of such information would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection
as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted
at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and
demonstrated by the industrial user furnishing a report that such information
should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose
trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by
the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to
governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES and/or TPDES programs, or
the city's pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the
person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and
other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as
confidential information and will be available to the public without
restriction.
(Ord. 12-1994-59, passed 12-13-94; Am. Ord. 08-2003-32, passed 4-26-03; Am.
Ord. 02-2006-16, passed 2-28-06; Am. Ord. 04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
§ 51.080 PUBLICATION OF INDUSTRIAL USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   The city shall publish at least annually (in April), in a newspaper of
general circulation that provides meaningful notice within the jurisdiction(s)
served by the POTW, a list of the industrial users which, during the previous
12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements as defined in §
51.072 under “significant noncompliance”.
(Ord. 12-1994-59, passed 12-13-94; Am. Ord. 08-2003-32, passed 4-26-03; Am.
Ord. 02-2006-16, passed 2-28-06; Am. Ord. 04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
§ 51.081 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   Phone call. Whenever the Superintendent finds that any user has
violated or is violating any provision of this subchapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
requirement, the Superintendent or his or her agent may inform the noncompliant
industry via telephone. The Superintendent will attempt to speak to the
authorized industrial user contact and explain the violation. The information
received from the industrial user contact concerning the violation will be
documented along with the time and date of the call in the violation summary
file. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take
action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without
this notice.
   (B)   Notice of Violation. Whenever the Superintendent finds that any user
has violated or is violating any provision of this subchapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
requirement, the Superintendent or his or her agent may serve upon the user a
written Notice of Violation. Within ten days of the receipt of this notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by
the user to the Superintendent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the
user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the
Notice of Violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
city to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement
action, without first issuing a Notice of Violation.
   (C)   Warning meetings. Whenever the Superintendent finds that any user has
violated or is violating any provision of this subchapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
requirement, the Superintendent or his or her agent may hold a warning meeting
with the industrial user's authorized representative to discuss such violation.
Records of actions taken, attending personnel, and other notes from the warning
meeting will be put in the Violation Summary file. Nothing in this section
shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency
actions or any other enforcement action, without first holding this meeting.
   (D)   Consent orders. The Superintendent is hereby empowered to enter into
consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar orders
establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance within a
time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same
force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to divisions (F)
and (G) of this section and shall be judicially enforceable.
   (E)   Show cause hearing. The Superintendent may order any user which causes
or contributes to violation(s) of any provisions of this subchapter, wastewater
discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, to appear before the Superintendent and show cause why
an enforcement action should not be pursued by the city. Notice shall be served
on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user
show cause why an enforcement action should not be pursued. The notice of the
meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return
receipt requested) at least 30 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be
served on any authorized representative of the user. Whether the user appears
as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued by the Superintendent
following the hearing. A show cause hearing shall not be a prerequisite for
taking any other action against the user.
   (F)   Compliance orders. When the Superintendent finds that a user has
violated or continues to violate any provision of this subchapter, wastewater
discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the Superintendent may issue an order to the user
responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance
within a reasonable amount of time designated in the order. If the user does
not come into compliance within the time allowed in the order, additional
enforcement action may result or sewer service may be discontinued. Compliance
orders may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance,
including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to
minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order
may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a federal
pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order release the
user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation.
Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other
action against the user.
   (G)   Cease and desist orders.
      (1)   When the Superintendent finds that a user is violating any
provision of this subchapter, the user's wastewater discharge permit, any order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that
the user's past violations are likely to recur, the Superintendent may issue an
order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations by
revoking the user's wastewater discharge permit and directing the user to:
         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements;
         (b)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge;
         (c)   Stop illegal or authorized discharges immediately; and/or
         (d)   Terminate all discharge from user's facility.
      (2)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to
taking any other action against the user.
   (H)   Administrative fines.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, any user
that is found to have violated any provision of this subchapter, its wastewater
discharge permit, or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000. Such
fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of
monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed
for each day during the period of violation.
      (2)   The Superintendent shall have such collection remedies as may be
available for other service charges and fees.
      (3)   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after being due and
unpaid for 30 days, be assessed an additional penalty of 15% of the unpaid
balance and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 1.5% per month. A
lien against the individual user's property will be sought for unpaid charges,
fines, and penalties.
      (4)   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request
for the Superintendent to reconsider the fine, and submit such with request of
full payment of the fine amount, within 15 days of being notified of the fine.
Where a request has merit, the Superintendent shall convene a hearing on the
matter within 120 days of receiving the request from the industrial user. In
the event the user's appeal is granted by the Superintendent, all or part of
the payment, together with all or part of any interest that has accrued and
been paid, shall be returned to the industrial user. The city may add the costs
of preparing administrative enforcement actions such as notices and orders to
the fine.
      (5)   The Superintendent may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court
costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred
by the city.
      (6)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a prerequisite for
taking any other action against the user.
   (I)   Emergency suspensions.
      (1)   Following verbal notice to the user, the Superintendent may
immediately suspend a user's discharge whenever such suspension is necessary in
order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to
present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. Following written notice and an opportunity of the user to
respond, the Superintendent may immediately suspend a user's discharge that
threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or may
present an endangerment to the environment.
         (a)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Superintendent shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
its receiving stream, or endangerment to persons or the environment. The
Superintendent shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user
has demonstrated to the Superintendent's satisfaction that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in
division (J) of this section are initiated against the user.
         (b)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence to the Superintendent, prior to the date
of any show cause or termination hearing under divisions (E) and (J) of this
section.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
   (J)   Termination of discharge.
      (1)   In addition to those provisions in §
51.076(F), any user that violates the following provisions of this subchapter,
wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, is subject to
discharge termination. The city may terminate wastewater disposal service and
disconnect an industrial user from the system when there is a:
         (a)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
         (b)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
         (c)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
         (d)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling;
         (e)   Violation of the pretreatment standards or pretreatment
requirements in §
51.073;
         (f)   Failure to pay monthly bills for water, sanitary sewer, and
industrial wastewater services when due;
         (g)   Discharge from the industrial user which, alone or in
combination with other discharges, causes the POTW to exceed its NPDES or TPDES
permits, or which causes damage or imbalance at the POTW; or
         (h)   Failure to fulfill the requirements of an order issued by the
city.
      (2)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and may be offered an opportunity to show cause under division (E) of
this section why the proposed action should not be taken. The authority to
terminate an industrial user's discharge is available to the city regardless of
the industrial user's compliance status.
      (3)   The city will continue a disconnection from the POTW until such
time as the industrial user substantiates its compliance with this subchapter,
and/or provides additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to address
the requirements of any wastewater discharge permit or order issued by the
city, or any provision of this subchapter. When the city agrees to reconnect
the industrial user, the industrial user will pay all costs for reconnection
and file for a new wastewater discharge permit. No waste can be discharged from
the industrial user to the POTW until a new wastewater discharge permit is
issued.
(Ord. 12-1994-59, passed 12-13-94; Am. Ord. 08-2003-32, passed 4-26-03; Am.
Ord. 02-2006-16, passed 2-28-06; Am. Ord. 04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
§ 51.082 JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment
requirement or continues to violate the provisions of this subchapter,
wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment requirement, the Superintendent may petition a District Court of
Johnson County through the City Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or
permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement
imposed by this subchapter on activities of the industrial user. Such other
action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by
the city. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite
to taking any other action against a user.
   (B)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Any user which has violated or continues to violate this
subchapter, any order of wastewater discharge permit hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum
civil penalty of $1,000 per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or
other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day
during the period of the violation.
      (2)   The Superintendent may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court
costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred
by the city.
      (3)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court may, in
addition to the criteria established in Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code § 54.017 take into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent
of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation,
any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, and corrective
actions taken by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other
factor as justice requires.
      (4)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a prerequisite for
taking any other action against a user.
   (C)   Criminal prosecution.
      (1)   Any user that willfully or negligently violates any provision of
this subchapter, any orders or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine no more than $2,000 per violation per day.
      (2)   Any user that willfully or negligently introduces any substance
into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine not more than
$2,000 per violation per day. This penalty shall be in addition to any other
cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state
law.
      (3)   Any user that knowingly makes any false statements,
representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or
other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
subchapter, wastewater discharge permit or order, or who falsifies, tampers
with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required
under this subchapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more
than $2,000 per violation per day.
      (4)   In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $2,000 per violation per day.
   (D)   Remedies nonexclusive. The provisions in §§
51.081 through
51.086 are not exclusive remedies. The city reserves the right to take any,
all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user.
Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the
city's enforcement response plan. However, the city reserves the right to take
other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city
is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant
user and these actions may be taken concurrently.
(Ord. 12-1994-59, passed 12-13-94; Am. Ord. 08-2003-32, passed 4-26-03; Am.
Ord. 02-2006-16, passed 2-28-06; Am. Ord. 04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
§ 51.083 SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION.
   (A)   Performance bonds. The Superintendent may decline to issue or reissue
a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has in the past failed to
comply with the provisions of this subchapter, any orders, or a previous
wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless such user first files a
satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value
determined by the Superintendent to be necessary to achieve consistent
compliance.
   (B)   Liability insurance. The Superintendent may decline to issue or
reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has in the past failed
to comply with the provisions of this subchapter, any order, or a previous
wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless the user first submits
proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair
damage to the POTW caused by its discharge or future discharges.
   (C)   Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to
violate the provisions of this subchapter, any orders, or wastewater discharge
permits issued hereunder, water service to the user may be severed. Service
will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily
demonstrated its ability to comply with this subchapter.
   (D)   Public nuisances. Any violation of this subchapter, wastewater
discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public
nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Superintendent or
his or her designee. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject
to the provisions of Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code Chapter 217, Subchapter C,
authorizing prohibition of such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for
any costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying said nuisance.
(Ord. 12-1994-59, passed 12-13-94; Am. Ord. 08-2003-32, passed 4-26-03; Am.
Ord. 02-2006-16, passed 2-28-06; Am. Ord. 04-20202-24, passed 4-14-20)
§ 51.084 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Act of God. If an industrial user can establish that an event that
would otherwise be a violation of this subchapter, or a violation of a permit
issued pursuant to this subchapter, was caused solely by an act of God, war,
strike, riot, or other catastrophe, the event is not a violation of this
subchapter or permit.
      (1)   Act of God defense.
         (a)   Act of God defense. The act of God defense constitutes a
statutory affirmative defense in an action brought in municipal or state court.
If a person can establish that an event that would otherwise be a violation of
a pretreatment ordinance, or a permit issued under the ordinance, was caused
solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot or other catastrophe, the event is
not a violation of the ordinance or permit.
         (b)   An industrial user who wishes to establish the act of God
affirmative defense shall demonstrate, through relevant evidence that:
            1.   An event that would otherwise be a violation of pretreatment
ordinance or a permit issued under the ordinance occurred, and the sole cause
of the event was an act of God, war, strike, riot or other catastrophe; and
            2.   The industrial user has submitted the following information to
the POTW and the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the event that would
otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance or a permit issued under
the ordinance (if this information is provided orally, a written submission
must be provided within five days):
               a.   A description of the event, and the nature and cause of the
event;
               b.   The time period of the event, including exact dates and
times or, if still continuing, the anticipated time the event is expected to
continue; and
               c.   Steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the event.
         (c)   Burden of proof. In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial
user seeking to establish the act of God affirmative defense shall have the
burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that an event that would
otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance, or a permit issued under
the ordinance, was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot or other
catastrophe.
   (B)   General/specific prohibitions. An industrial user shall have an
affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the general and specific prohibitions in §
51.073 if it can prove that it did not know or have reason to know that its
discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would
cause pass through or interference and that either a local limit exists for
each pollutant discharged and the industrial user was in compliance with each
local limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference
event, or that no local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when
the city was regularly in compliance with its TPDES, NPDES, or TCEQ permit, and
in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or
disposal requirements.
   (C)   Bypass.
      (1)   (a)   BYPASS. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of an industrial user's treatment facility.
         (b)   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the presence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
      (2)   An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not
cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation and the
Superintendent is properly notified. These bypasses are not subject to the
provision of division (C)(3) and (4) of this section.
      (3)   (a)   If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a
bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW, at least ten days before the
date of the bypass or as soon as forseeable.
         (b)   An industrial user shall submit an oral notice of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the POTW
within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the industrial
user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a
description of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass
has been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps
taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
The POTW may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral
report has been received within 24 hours.
      (4)   (a)   Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take enforcement
action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless:
            1.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;
            2.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
            3.   The industrial user submitted notices as required under
division (C)(3) of this section.
         (b)   The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in division (C)(4)(a) of this section.
(Ord. 12-1994-59, passed 12-13-94; Am. Ord. 08-2003-32, passed 4-26-03; Am.
Ord. 02-2006-16, passed 2-28-06; Am. Ord. 04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
§ 51.085 SURCHARGE COSTS.
   (A)   Adoption of reasonable charges and fees. The city may adopt reasonable
charges and fees for surcharges.
   (B)   Agreement to pay industrial waste charge and added costs.
      (1)   If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city
does not cause overloading of the sewage collection system, treatment or
disposal facilities of the POTW, then prior to approval, the city and the
person making the discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that
the discharger pay an industrial waste charge to be determined from the
schedule of charges.
      (2)   If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city
requires that wastewater collection, treatment, or other disposal facilities of
the city be improved, expanded, or enlarged in order to treat the waste, then
prior to approval, the city and the person making the discharge shall enter
into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay in full all added
costs the city may incur due to acceptance of the waste.
      (3)   The agreement entered into pursuant to division (B) of this section
shall include but not limited to:
         (a)   Amortization of all capital outlay for collecting and treating
the waste, including new capital outlay and the proportionate part of the value
of the existing system used in handling and treating the waste; and
         (b)   Operation and maintenance costs, including salaries and wages,
power costs, costs of chemicals and supplies, proper allowances for
maintenance, depreciation, overhead, and office expense.
      (4)   Amortization shall be completed in a maximum of a 15- year period
and payment shall include all debt service costs.
   (C)   Adjustment of charges.
      (1)   The city shall adjust charges at least annually to reflect changes
in the characteristics of wastewater based on the results of sampling and
testing.
      (2)   Increases in charges shall be retroactive for two billing periods
and shall continue for six billing periods unless subsequent tests determine
that the charge should be further increased.
      (3)   The city shall review at least annually the basis for determining
charges and shall adjust the unit treatment cost in the formula to reflect
increases or decreases in wastewater treatment costs based on the previous
year's experience.
      (4)   The city shall bill the discharger by the month. The discharger
shall pay monthly in accordance with practices existing for payment of sewer
charges.
   (D)   Failure to pay bill. In addition to sanctions provided for in this
subchapter, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the
subchapter for failure to pay the bill for water, sanitary sewer and industrial
waste service when due.
(Ord. 12-1994-59, passed 12-13-94; Am. Ord. 08-2003-32, passed 4-26-03; Am.
Ord. 02-2006-16, passed 2-28-06; Am. Ord. 04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
§ 51.086 PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.
   (A)   The city may adopt reasonable charges and fees for reimbursement of
costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may
include:
      (1)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the
cost of processing such applications.
      (2)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures
including the cost of collection and analyzing an industrial user's discharge,
and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by industrial users.
      (3)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge
procedures and construction.
      (4)   Fees for filing appeals.
      (5)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements of this subchapter. These fees relate solely to the matters
covered by this subchapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and
penalties chargeable by the city.
   (B)   If the city selects an independent firm or laboratory to perform
sampling and analyses, the city may at its option, allow the independent firm
or laboratory to send invoices directly to the industrial users for services
requested and approved by the city.
(Ord. 12-1994-59, passed 12-13-94; Am. Ord. 08-2003, passed 4-26-03; Am. Ord.
02-2006-16, passed 2-28-06; Am. Ord. 04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
WASTE HAULERS
§ 51.100 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED. Accepted as satisfactory under terms of this subchapter and is
given formal approval by the Approving Authority.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The City of Cleburne or its duly authorized deputy,
agent or representative.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Works or his or her duly authorized
representative.
   DISPOSAL. To discharge, deposit, inject, dump, spill, leak or place any
solid, semi-solid or liquid waste such as septage waste into or on any land or
water so that such waste or any constituent of such waste may enter the
environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any water course of
ground waters.
   DISPOSER. A person who receives, stores, retains, processes, or disposes of
septic waste.
   GENERATOR. A person who causes, creates, generates or otherwise produces
septic waste.
   LIQUID WASTE. Septic waste and/or any other wastes which is nontoxic and
meets the requirements of §
51.073(A).
   MANAGER. A person conducting, supervising, managing or representing the
activities of a generator, transporter or disposer.
   MANIFEST SYSTEM. A system of documents or trip tickets used to track
generation, transportation and disposal of waste products.
   OWNER. Any person who owns a facility or any portion of a facility.
   PERMIT. A formal written document issued to a person by the Approving
Authority authorizing hauling and disposal of septage wastes.
   PERMITTEE. A person or persons granted a permit under this subchapter.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other
legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns.
   POTW (PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS). Means a treatment works as defined by
Section 212 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 USC 1292. This
definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid
nature. It also includes lift stations, sewers, pipes and other conveyances
only if they convey wastewater to a POTW. In this subchapter, POTW shall refer
to the City of Cleburne POTW.
   SANITARY SEWER. A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or
industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm, surface,
groundwater and other unpolluted waters are not intentionally passed.
   SEPTAGE. Wastes removed from a portable toilet, chemical toilet or septic
tank.
   SPECIAL WASTES. Any liquid, semi-liquid, solid or combination thereof that
because of its quantity, concentration, physical or chemical characteristics or
biological properties require special handling or disposal to protect human
health or the environment, excluding grease traps, grit traps, and waste oil
traps.
   TANK. A device designated to contain an accumulation of septage waste which
is constructed primarily of non-earthen materials such as concrete, steel or
plastic to provide adequate structural support for holding of such waste.
   TCEQ. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
   TOXIC WASTE. Any liquid, semi-liquid, or solid waste material which has the
ability to chemically produce injury once it reaches a susceptible site in or
on the body.
   TRANSPORTER. A person who operates a vehicle for the purpose of transporting
liquid waste.
   TRIP TICKET. A document used to designate a chain of custody and other
information required by the Approving Authority.
   VEHICLE. An approved mobile device in which liquid waste may be transported
upon a public street or highway.
(Ord. 3-1995-7, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 05-2009-30, passed 5-26-09; Am. Ord.
04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
§ 51.101 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   A person must obtain a waste hauler permit to dispose of septage at
the POTW. Industrial wastewaters including wastes from grease traps, grit traps
or other pretreatment systems are not considered septage or allowed for
disposal under a waste hauler permit. (Industrial wastes are regulated in §§
51.070 through
51.086).
   (B)   A permit is not transferable.
   (C)   A waste hauling permit issued by the city is specific and excludes the
collection and storage of materials that are hazardous in nature.
(Ord. 3-1995-7, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 05-2009-30, passed 5-26-09; Am. Ord.
04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
§ 51.102 FEE; DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The waste hauler is required to obtain a TCEQ permit, the Approving
Authority shall not issue a permit to any waste hauler that is not permitted by
the TCEQ. Registration numbers must be posted on each approved vehicle in
accordance with TCEQ rule.
   (B)   A permit will not be issued unless the $75 permit fee is paid to the
city. This permit must be renewed every two years.
   (C)    The Approving Authority shall number permits consecutively, and each
permit holder shall cause the permit to be displayed as prescribed by the
Approving Authority.
(Ord. 3-1995-7, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 05-2009-30, passed 5-26-09; Am. Ord.
04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.103 RESPONSIBILITIES OF LIQUID WASTE TRANSPORTER.
   (A)   Operator shall determine if the content of the trap is acceptable
waste for a permitted vehicle. The vehicle shall be equipped and of sufficient
size to handle load.
   (B)   A permitted transporter shall not transport materials which are
hazardous as defined herein.
   (C)   A manifest system approved by the city shall be used to document
transportation and disposal of all applicable liquid waste as follows:
      (1)   Trip ticket books shall be purchased by the transporter from the
city Water Utilities Superintendent at a cost of $25;
      (2)   A transporter shall complete one trip ticket for each location
serviced, with the exception of chemical/portable toilet companies servicing
their own units. Chemical/portable toilet companies servicing their own units
only shall submit one trip ticket for each load regardless of number of units
serviced and must present for inspection/testing prior to discharge of waste;
      (3)   White copy of trip ticket to be signed by transporter and generator
at time of waste collection with yellow copy maintained by generator;
      (4)   White copy of trip ticket to be signed by a representative of the
city Wastewater Treatment Plant at time of disposal with white copy maintained
by the city's representative;
      (5)   Gold and pink copies of trip ticket to be maintained by
transporter;
      (6)   A copy of all trip tickets shall be maintained by the transporters
in accordance with TCEQ rule.
   (D)   Transporter shall completely evacuate all liquid waste, semi-solid
waste and solid waste from each trap serviced.
(Ord. 3-1995-7, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 05-2009-30, passed 5-26-09; Am. Ord.
04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.104 ACCUMULATION OF LIQUID WASTE AND DISPOSAL.
   A person commits an offense if they allow liquid waste that emits noxious or
offensive odors, is unsanitary or injurious to public health, to accumulate
upon property under their control.
(Ord. 3-1995-7, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20) Penalty,
see §
51.999
§ 51.105 DISPOSAL OF LIQUID WASTE.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if they discharge liquid waste in an
unapproved site, offer liquid waste for sale (other than waste oil recycling),
or exchange liquid waste for barter.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if they allow discharge of liquid waste
into a street, storm drainage system, sanitary sewer, water course or stream.
   (C)   The fee for disposing waste at the Cleburne Wastewater Treatment Plant
shall be $25, plus the current rate of commercial accounts.
(Ord. 3-1995-7, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 05-2009-30, passed 5-26-09; Am. Ord.
04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.106 RESPONSIBILITIES OF POTW.
   (A)   Obtain and maintain compliance with all licenses and/or permits
required by local, state or federal law.
   (B)   Accept waste only from a permitted transporter.
   (C)   Maintain trip ticket copies in accordance with TCEQ rule.
   (D)   Accept only those classes of wastes authorized by license or permit.
   (E)   Make available all records required to be kept for inspection by the
Approving Authority at any time during normal business hours.
(Ord. 3-1995-7, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 05-2009-30, passed 5-26-09; Am. Ord.
04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
§ 51.107 DENIAL, SUSPENSION, AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The Approving Authority may deny a permit if it is determined that an
applicant is not qualified under this subchapter, or if it is determined that
the POTW cannot accept additional loadings. The Approving Authority may refuse
to accept any loads during times of plant upset or if it is believed that a
load may cause harm to the treatment works or would violate Industrial Waste
Ordinance, see §§
51.070 through
51.086. The Approving Authority may suspend or revoke a permit if it is
determined that a permittee:
      (1)   Is not qualified under this subchapter;
      (2)   Has violated a provision of this subchapter;
      (3)   Has failed to pay a required fee;
      (4)   Has failed to deliver trip tickets to the Approving Authority;
      (5)   Has failed to have a current TCEQ permit and all vehicle
registration numbers posted, if required by a state or federal agency.
   (B)   After suspension or revocation under this section, a permittee may
file a request for reinstatement of the permit. When the Approving Authority
determines that the permittee is again qualified after all violations have been
corrected, precautions have been taken to prevent future violations, and all
required fees have been paid, he or she may reinstate the permit.
   (C)   The Approving Authority may revoke for a period of one year or less
all permits held by a liquid waste transporter if the transporter or any
employee of the transporter violates any of the provisions of this subchapter,
any rule or regulation promulgated by the Approving Authority, applicable
provisions of the city Code of Ordinances or state law.
   (D)   A permittee whose permit is suspended or revoked shall not collect,
transport, or dispose of any waste materials within the jurisdiction of the
Approving Authority.
(Ord. 3-1995-7, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 05-2009-30, passed 5-26-09; Am. Ord.
04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.108 APPEAL.
   If the Approving Authority denies the issuance of a permit or suspends or
revokes a permit, he or she shall send to the applicant or permit holder, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and the
right to a hearing if a written request for a hearing is filed with the
Approving Authority by the applicant or permit holder within ten days after
receipt of written notice of action taken. The hearing provided for in this
section shall be conducted by a Regulatory Committee at a time and place
designated by the Approving Authority. The permit holder shall be notified of
such hearing no less than ten days prior to the hearing date. The Regulatory
Committee shall be appointed by the Approving Authority and shall be comprised
of the city Public Works Director, the city Health Official and the Building
Official. Based upon the record of such hearing, the Regulatory Committee
shall, upon the affirmative vote of the majority, make a finding to sustain,
modify or rescind any official denial, suspension, revocation or order
considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be
furnished to the applicant or permit holder by the Regulatory Committee within
ten days after the date of hearing.
(Ord. 3-1995-7, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 04-2020-24, passed 4-14-20)
ON-SITE SEWAGE FACILITIES
§ 51.120 ADOPTING PROVISIONS OF TEXAS HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE.
   The city clearly understands the technical criteria, legal requirements and
administrative procedures and duties associated with regulating on-site sewage
facilities, does adopt and will fully enforce Texas Health and Safety Code, Ch.
366, and subsequent amendments thereto.
(Ord. 8-1995-21, passed 8-22-95; Am. Ord. 09-2007-52, passed 9-25-07)
§ 51.121 AREA OF JURISDICTION.
   The Rules adopted by this subchapter shall apply to all of the incorporated
area of the city.
(Ord. 8-1995-21, passed 8-22-95; Am. Ord. 09-2007-52, passed 9-25-07)
§ 51.122 ON-SITE SEWAGE FACILITY RULES; COMPLIANCE.
   Any structure discharging sewage into an on-site sewage facility within the
jurisdiction area of the city must comply with the Rules adopted by this
subchapter.
(Ord. 8-1995-21, passed 8-22-95; Am. Ord. 09-2007-52, passed 9-25-07)
§ 51.123 DESIGN CRITERIA FOR ON-SITE SEWAGE FACILITIES; INCORPORATION BY
REFERENCE.
   (A)   The Rules established by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
for on-site sewage systems are hereby adopted, and all officials and employees
of the city having duties under said Rules are authorized to perform such
duties as are required of them under said Rules.
   (B)   The Rules and all future amendments and revisions thereto are
incorporated by reference and are thus made a part of this subchapter. A copy
of current Rules shall be on file with the designated representative for the
city and the City Secretary's office.
   (C)   All habitable structures must be connected to either the city sanitary
sewer system or an approved sewage disposal system.
   (D)   Persons in the city, regardless of the amount of land owned, on which
an on-site sewage facility is to be utilized, must obtain a permit from the
designated representative of the city prior to installation, construction, or
repair of an on-site sewage facility. All on-site sewage facilities shall be
constructed or installed according to 30 TAC Chapter 285.
   (E)   All OSSF systems must be designed by either a registered professional
engineer or registered professional sanitarian, that an on-site sewage facility
can be operated without causing a threat or harm to an existing or proposed
water supply system or to the public health, or creating the threat of
pollution or nuisance conditions. No self installations shall be allowed.
   (F)   A variance may be granted for individual tracts of land smaller than
one acre, if a registered professional engineer or registered sanitarian
designs the system to operate in accordance with Rules. The request for the
variance must be thoroughly reviewed by the designated representative and
submitted to the Board of Appeals or City Council for its final determination.
   (G)   Any on-site sewage disposal system using aerobic treatment shall have
a maintenance contract on that system. All contracted maintenance shall be
conducted by a TCEQ registered maintenance company. There shall be no
homeowner/occupant/or property owner treatment. The maintenance provider must
submit quarterly inspection reports to the designated representative with the
city.
   (H)   The designated representative may periodically inspect the on-site
sewage disposal system using aerobic treatment, regardless of when the
authorized agent conducted the last inspection.
(Ord. 8-1995-21, passed 8-22-95; Am. Ord. 09-2007-52, passed 9-25-07)
§ 51.124 DEVELOPMENT OR ORGANIZED DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   In order to implement the stated policy of the legislature and the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality to encourage the development and use of
organized disposal systems to serve the waste disposal needs of the citizens of
the state and to prevent pollution, protect the public health and maintain and
enhance the quality of water in the state, the following requirements are made:
   (A)   Distance requirements.
      (1)   All developers shall extend sanitary service to the city sewer
mains if the development is within the following distances to the nearest
existing sanitary sewer line which has adequate capacity, as determined by the
City Engineer:
 
Subdivision (Lots) The sewer line must be extended from the boundary of the
                   subdivision
1–10             1/8 mile
11–25            1/4 mile
26–100        3/4 mile
101–200          1 mile
201 or higher      No limit
 
      (2)   Parcels subdivided on a piecemeal basis will be considered on the
basis of the aggregate number of lots.
   (B)   Waste water system exceptions. If all of the requirements below are
met, the developer will not be required to provide sewer service to the
subdivision and individual on-site sewage facilities may be placed on the lots.
The on-site sewage facilities must conform to division (C) of this section in
addition to all county and state regulations. If the subdivision does not
conform to all of the below requirements, the developer may install a private
collection system and wastewater treatment facility that meets the state and
county regulations in lieu of connecting to city sanitary sewer service. The
private collection system must be available to each lot in the subdivision and
drain into one central wastewater treatment facility. The requirements are as
follows:
      (1)   The distance in division (C) of this section are exceeded;
      (2)   The developer does not own any adjacent property and is subdividing
his or her property into less than three lots;
      (3)   The lots are one acre or larger; and two acres if division (C) of
this section is applicable. Lots less than one acre will be accepted when
annexed in as a platted lot;
      (4)   A on-site sewage facility is designed in accordance with county and
state requirements which will utilize less than 50% of the area of the lot;
      (5)   None of the on-site sewage facility is in the floodplain; and
      (6)   The City Council approves a waiver for a wastewater treatment
system at the time of approval of the final plat.
   (C)   Any subdivision or portion thereof, lying within 1,300 feet of the
service spillway level (elevation 733.5 feet above mean sea level) in Lake Pat
Cleburne shall follow provisions set out in §
98.058 for the city in addition to minimum state and county regulations in
order to place a septic tank. In addition to these requirements:
      (1)   The design of the on-site sewage facilities shall be based upon a
site/soil evaluation performed by a TCEQ licensed site evaluator or
professional engineer.
      (2)   The minimum lot size shall be two acres.
(Ord. 8-1995-21, passed 8-22-95; Am. Ord. 09-2007-52, passed 9-25-07)
§ 51.125 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY; DUTIES AND POWERS.
   The Building Official of the city is herewith declared the designated
representative for the enforcement of the Rules within its jurisdictional area.
The appointed individual(s) must be approved and certified by the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality before assuming the duties and
responsibilities of the designated representative of the city. The designated
representative shall have the following duties and concomitant powers:
   (A)   To resolve any question regarding any interpretation of these Rules,
or the design criteria.
   (B)   To enforce these Rules and to make appropriate recommendations to
proper city officials when instances of noncompliance with these Rules have
been determined.
   (C)   To make statutorily mandated inspections of proposed, new and existing
on-site sewage facilities.
   (D)   To collect fees set by the authorized agent as necessary to recover
the reasonable costs incurred in meeting the requirements of these Rules.
   (E)   To make semi-annual reports to the authorized agent on all actions,
including legal actions, taken concerning these Rules.
   (F)   To investigate nuisance complaints within 21 days of receipt. All
validated complaints shall be resolved or substantial progress made toward
resolution by the responsible individual within 30 days.
   (G)   To perform all other duties necessary to meet the requirements of
these Rules.
(Ord. 8-1995-21, passed 8-22-95; Am. Ord. 09-2007-52, passed 9-25-07)
§ 51.126 LICENSE TO OPERATE.
   Each new on-site sewage facility shall be inspected and approved by the
designated representative prior to the final covering of the facility.
   (A)   The applicant or registered installer shall notify the designated
representative that an inspection is desired at least five working days prior
to the need for inspection.
   (B)   The applicant or registered installer shall provide whatever
reasonable assistance the designated representative requests in order to make
the inspection.
   (C)   The applicant or registered installer must be present at the time of
the inspection for that facility.
(Ord. 8-1995-21, passed 8-22-95; Am. Ord. 09-2007-52, passed 9-25-07)
§ 51.127 APPEALS.
   Persons aggrieved by an action or decision of the designated representative
may appeal such action or decision to the City Council of the city.
(Ord. 8-1995-21, passed 8-22-95; Am. Ord. 09-2007-52, passed 9-25-07)
§ 51.128 INSPECTIONS TO ASSURE COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The designated representative may routinely inspect on-site sewage
facilities to assure continued compliance with these Rules.
   (B)   The designated representative shall inspect any on-site system that is
believed to be causing pollution, a threat to the public health, nuisance
conditions or illegally installed or altered. If upon inspection, it is found
that any of these conditions exists, the owner of the on-site sewage facility
will be notified in writing of the violation, and what must be done to achieve
compliance, and set a reasonable amount of time to comply. The on-site sewage
facility shall be reinspected at the expiration of the allotted time.
      (1)   If the facility is found to be compliant, a license therefore may
be issued or the existing license may be modified.
      (2)   If the facility is found to be noncompliant, appropriate
enforcement shall be taken.
(Ord. 8-1995-21, passed 8-22-95; Am. Ord. 09-2007-52, passed 9-25-07)
§ 51.129 EMERGENCY REPAIR.
   An emergency repair to an on-site sewage facility without a permit is not an
offense under these Rules if the following procedures are carried out:
   (A)   The repair is made for the purpose of abatement of an immediate,
dangerous and serious health hazard;
   (B)   That said repair does meet minimum state design criteria;
   (C)   That said repair does not constitute an alteration of the on-site
system;
   (D)   That written notification of such repair, including a detailed
description of the method and materials used in said repair, is made to the
authorized agent within 72 hours of the date of the repair; and
   (E)   That said repair must be inspected for compliance with the Rules.
(Ord. 8-1995-21, passed 8-22-95; Am. Ord. 09-2007-52, passed 9-25-07)
§ 51.130 RELINQUISHMENT OF ORDINANCE.
   If the City Council decides that it no longer wishes to regulate on-site
sewage facilities in its area of jurisdiction, the City Council shall follow
the procedures outlined below:
   (A)   The City Council shall inform the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality by certified mail at least 30 days before the published date of the
public hearing notice that it wishes to relinquish its on-site sewage facility
ordinance.
   (B)   The City Council shall post the required public notice in a newspaper
regularly published or circulated in the area of jurisdiction at least 30 days
prior to the anticipated date of action by the authorized agent and must
solicit written comments for that 30-day period.
   (C)   The City Council shall send a copy of the public notice, a publisher's
affidavit of public notice, and a certified copy of the courts minutes to the
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
   (D)   Upon relinquishment of the ordinance, the local governmental entity
shall surrender its area of jurisdiction to the Commission.
   (E)   The local governmental entity shall pay the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality the appropriate charge back fees for permitting,
inspections and complaint investigations of on-site sewage facilities in the
surrendered area of jurisdiction.
(Ord. 8-1995-21, passed 8-22-95; Am. Ord. 09-2007-52, passed 9-25-07)
§ 51.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
other penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty set forth in §
10.99
   (B)   (1)   A person who violates any provision of §§
51.015 through
51.040 is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine
of not more than $500 for each act of violation and for each day of violation.
      (2)   In addition to proceeding under authority of division (B)(1) above,
the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which
it is entitled under authority of statutes or this ordinance or other
ordinances against persons violating any provision of §§
51.015 through
51.040.
(Ord. 10-1993-36, passed 10-12-93; Am. Ord. 09-2007-52, passed 9-25-07; Am.
Ord. 07-2010-35, passed 7-13-10; Am. Ord. 09-2010-54, passed 9-14-10; Am. Ord.
09-2010-55, passed 9-14-10)
   (C)   Penalty for violation of §§
51.100 through
51.108.
      (1)   In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by persons, it is the
intent of this subchapter (§§
51.108 through
51.108) to hold a corporation or association legally responsible for prohibited
conduct performed by an agent acting on behalf of a corporation or association
and within the scope of his or her office or employment.
      (2)   Any person, operator or owner who violates any provisions of this
subchapter (§§
51.100 through
51.108) shall be liable to the city a maximum civil penalty of $1,000 per
violation per day.
      (3)   The city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and
other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.
      (4)   A person, operator or owner who violates any provisions of this
subchapter (§§
51.100 through
51.108) is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine
of not more than $2,000 for each act of violation and for each day of
violation.
(Ord. 8-1995-21, passed 8-22-95; Am. Ord. 09-2007-52, passed 9-25-07)
   (D)   Penalties for violation of §§
51.120 through
51.130. The city adopts the criminal, injunction or civil suit, and civil
penalty provisions as set forth in the sections of Texas Health and Safety
Code, §§ 366.091, 366.092 and 366.0921 and/or any other such penalties (Section
341.091 of the Texas Department of Health, Chapter 341) that may be provided by
state law. Each day of a continuing violation is a separate offense and is
punishable as such.
      (1)   Criminal penalties (Texas Health and Safety Code, § 366.091).
         (a)   A person commits an offense if a person operates as an installer
unless the person is registered by the state.
         (b)   A person commits an offense if the person violates a rule
adopted by the Commission under this subchapter or an order or resolution
adopted by an authorized agent under subchapter C in a county that is
contiguous to an internal border.
         (c)   A person commits an offense if the person begins to construct,
alter, extend or repair an on-site sewage facility owned by another person
before the owner of the system obtains a permit to install, construct, alter,
extend or repair the on-site system as required.
         (d)   An emergency repair to an on-site sewage facility without a
permit is not an offense under these Rules if:
            1.   The repair is made for the purpose of abatement of an
immediate health hazard;
            2.    That said repair does meet minimum state design criteria or
the more stringent design criteria of the authorized agent;
            3.    That said repair does not constitute an alteration of the on-
site system;
            4.    That written notification of such repair, including a
detailed description of the method and materials used in said repair, is made
to the authorized agent not later than 72 hours after the repair is begun;
            5.    That said repair must be inspected for compliance with the
state's or authorized agent's design criteria.
         (e)    An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor unless
it is shown in the trial of the defendant that the defendant has previously
been convicted of an offense under this chapter, in which event the offense is
punishable by:
            1.    A fine of not less than $125 nor more than $500;
            2.    Confinement in jail for not more than one month; or
            3.    Both the fine and confinement.
         (f)    Each day that a violation occur constitutes a separate offense.
      (2)   Injunction or civil suit (Texas Health and Safety Code, § 366.092).
         (a)    If this appears that a person has violated, is violating, or is
threatening to violate any provision of Texas Health and Safety Code, Chapter
366, or any rule, permit or other order of the Commission issued pursuant to
Texas Health and Safety Code, Chapter 366, the Commission in partnership with
the authorized agent or the Commission independently may request the Attorney
General to bring a civil suit for:
            1.    Mandatory or prohibitory injunctive relief, as warranted by
the facts;
            2.    A civil penalty as provided by Texas Health and Safety Code,
Chapter 366; or
            3.    Both injunctive relief and civil penalty.
         (b)    Venue for an action under Texas Health and Safety Code, Chapter
366, is in Travis County District Court, the county in which the defendant
resides, or in the county in which the violation occurs.
      (3)   Civil penalty (Texas Health and Safety Code, § 366.0921).
         (a)    The authorized agent may request that the Commission initiate
an enforcement action pursuant to these sections through a petition filled with
the Commission.
            1.    An owner who violates any provision of Texas Health and
Safety Code, Chapter 366, or any rule, permit or order issued pursuant to Texas
Health and Safety Code, Chapter 366, is subject to a civil penalty of not less
than $100 nor more than $500 for each act of violation and for each day of
violation.
            2.    Any other person who violates any provision of Texas Health
and Safety Code, Chapter 366, is subject to a civil penalty of not less than
$500 nor more than $5,000 for each act of violation and for each day of
violation.
         (b)    The civil penalties recovered shall be divided between the
authorized agent and the state based on the proportion of resources expended by
each entity in the course of the enforcement action.
      (4)   Texas Health and Safety Code, Chapter 341 (Subchapter B. Nuisance
and General Sanitation.)
         (a)    Criminal penalties (Texas Health and Safety Code, § 341.091).
            1.    A person commits an offense if the person violates this
subchapter or a rule adopted under this subchapter. An offense under this
section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $10 or more than
$200.
            2.    If it is shown on the trial of the defendant that the
defendant has been convicted of an offense under this chapter within a year
before the date on which the offense being tried occurred, the defendant shall
be punishable by a fine of not less than $10 or more than $1,000, confinement
in jail for not more than 30 days, or both.
   (E)   Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates
any of the provisions of §§
51.030,
51.031 or
51.033 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
fined not to exceed $500 for each offense. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 09-2004-53, passed 9-14-04; Am. Ord. 09-2004-54, passed 9-14-04; Am. Ord.
09-2007-52, passed 9-25-07)
   (F)   Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates
any of the provisions of §
51.052 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
fined not to exceed $500 for each offense. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 01-2005-08, passed 1-25-05; Am. Ord. 09-2007-52, passed 9-25-07; Am. Ord.
04-2011-14, passed 4-26-11; Am. Ord. 04-2011-15, passed 4-26-11)
CHAPTER 52: MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE UTILITY
Section
General Provisions
   
52.001   Findings
   
52.002   Establishment of a municipal drainage utility system
   
52.003   Public utility
   
52.004   Service area
   
52.005   No waiver of immunity
Charges Levied and Imposed
   
52.020   Findings
   
52.021   Drainage charge established
   
52.022   Categories of land use
   
52.023   Monthly drainage charge
 
   
52.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.001 FINDINGS.
   The City Council has found and hereby finds that:
   (A)   The city will establish a schedule of drainage charges against all
real property in the city's service area subject to charges under Tex. Local
Gov't Code Chapter 402, Subchapter C;
   (B)   The city will provide drainage for all real property in the city's
service area on payment of drainage charges, except real property exempted
under Tex. Local Gov't Code Chapter 402, Subchapter C; and
   (C)   The city will offer drainage service on nondiscriminatory, reasonable
and equitable terms.
(Ord. 01-2004-02, passed 1-13-04)
§ 52.002 ESTABLISHMENT OF A MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM.
   The provisions of Tex. Local Gov't Code Chapter 402, Subchapter C are hereby
declared to be adopted and a municipal drainage utility system is hereby
established by the authority of that subchapter and by the authority of the
City Council.
(Ord. 01-2004-02, passed 1-13-04)
§ 52.003 PUBLIC UTILITY.
   The drainage of the city is declared to be a public utility. Existing
facilities are incorporated in the drainage utility as permitted by Tex. Local
Gov't Code § 402.046.
(Ord. 01-2004-02, passed 1-13-04)
§ 52.004 SERVICE AREA.
   The drainage utility service area is the area within the city limits,
pursuant to Tex. Local Gov't Code § 402.044(8).
(Ord. 01-2004-02, passed 1-13-04)
§ 52.005 NO WAIVER OF IMMUNITY.
   This chapter does not imply that a benefitted property will be free from
flooding or erosion, and does not create additional duties on the part of the
city. This chapter does not waive the city's immunity under any law.
(Ord. 01-2004-02, passed 1-13-04)
CHARGES LEVIED AND IMPOSED
§ 52.020 FINDINGS.
   The City Council has found and hereby finds that:
   (A)   The amount of impervious cover on a benefitted property is directly
related to the amount of drainage from that property;
   (B)   It is reasonable to assume an average impervious cover of 3,589 square
feet as one Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU);
   (C)   The assessment of drainage charges in Cleburne is based upon an
inventory of the lots and tracts within the service area of the city; and
   (D)   It is nondiscriminatory, equitable, and reasonable to classify
benefitted properties in the city as residential, multi-family, or commercial.
(Ord. 01-2004-03, passed 1-13-04)
§ 52.021 DRAINAGE CHARGE ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   A drainage charge is established.
   (B)   The drainage charge shall be paid by the user of each benefitted
property in the service area, as defined in Tex. Local Gov't Code § 402.044(1).
   (C)   The drainage charge is based on the average amount of impervious cover
on the benefitted property.
(Ord. 01-2004-03, passed 1-13-04)
§ 52.022 CATEGORIES OF LAND USE.
   (A)   The city shall categorize each benefitted property based upon the land
use made of the property, pursuant to Tex. Local Gov't Code § 402.047.
   (B)   The categories of land use shall include:
      (1)   Residential (property with a single-family household, duplex, or
triplex);
      (2)   Multi-family (property with a complex of four or more units); and
      (3)   Commercial (property with a commercial or industrial business).
(Ord. 01-2004-03, passed 1-13-04)
§ 52.023 MONTHLY DRAINAGE CHARGE.
   (A)   The following schedule of drainage charges is hereby established:
      (1)   Residential (0 - 0.5 acre) = $2.75 per month;
      (2)   Residential (0.5 - 1 acre) = $3.63 per month;
      (3)   Residential (over 1 acre) = $4.85 per month;
      (4)   Commercial (0 - 0.3 acre) = $3.19 per month;
      (5)   Commercial (0.3 - 0.5 acre) = $6.71 per month;
      (6)   Commercial (0.5 - 1 acre) = $15.00 per month;
      (7)   Commercial (1 - 3 acres) = $20.65 per month;
      (8)   Commercial (3 - 5 acres) = $47.13 per month;
      (9)   Commercial (over 5 acres) = $93.00 per month; and
      (10)   Multi-family units = $1.88 per unit per month.
   (B)   The drainage charges established by this section shall be billed to
the user of the benefitted property along with the bill for other city-provided
utility services afforded to the property. The drainage charges shall be
identified separately on the bill as "Drainage Utility Charge."
   (C)   The city shall not require a deposit for drainage charges as a
precondition to accepting surface flow into the city's drainage system.
Delinquent drainage charges are subject to the same penalties and methods of
collection as other utility charges for utility services provided by the city.
   (D)   The income of the drainage utility system shall be segregated and
completely identifiable in the accounts of the city pursuant to Tex. Local
Gov't Code § 402.049. The revenues produced by the drainage charges established
by this chapter shall be applied to the funding of operating requirements,
maintenance requirements, future system improvements and other capital costs,
and the development and implementation of a storm water management program by
the city.
   (E)   A user may apply to the City Manager or his or her designee for an
adjustment in the user's drainage charge if:
      (1)   The user demonstrates that the drainage charge schedule, as applied
to the user's benefitted property, does not fairly reflect the cost of service
to the user's benefitted property;
      (2)   The user demonstrates that the category of developed use or another
factor used in calculating the drainage charge for the user's benefitted
property is unfair; or
      (3)   The user demonstrates that the user's drainage charge has been
assessed in error.
   (F)   The City Manager or his or her designee shall adopt procedures to
ensure that applications for adjustments of drainage charges will be processed
and acted upon in a consistent and uniform manner, and may thereafter adjust
the drainage charge of a user who applies for an adjustment under division (E)
of this section and who meets the standards required therein.
(Ord. 01-2004-03, passed 1-13-04; Am. Ord. 05-2004-34, passed 5-25-04; Am. Ord.
09-2007-48, passed 9-11-07)
§ 52.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined not to exceed $500 for each offense. Each day
that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 01-2004-03, passed 1-13-04)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      Chapter
         
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
         
72.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
         
73.   RAILROADS
         
74.   RESERVED
         
75.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Vehicle equipment
   
70.03   Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers
   
70.04   Duty to stop in event of accident
   
70.05   Accident reports
   
70.06   Application of title to drivers of government vehicles
   
70.07   Application of title to authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.08   Application of title to persons propelling pushcarts, riding animals
and the like
   
70.09   Motor vehicles: racing motor; sudden starts or stops; unnecessary horn
blowing; auxiliary or compression engine brakes
   
70.10   Motor vehicles: accelerating or operating in manner that causes tires
to break traction or to leave the pavement
   
70.11   Abandoned vehicles
   
70.12   Authority to take abandoned vehicle into custody
   
70.13   Taking abandoned vehicle into custody; notice
   
70.14   Storage, auction, proceeds and use of abandoned vehicles
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.15   Conformity with State Highway Department
   
70.16   Council to designate location
   
70.17   Installation and maintenance
   
70.18   Designation and maintenance of crosswalks
   
70.19   Marking traffic lanes
   
70.20   Obedience to devices
   
70.21   Necessity of signs
   
70.22   Traffic-control signal legend generally
   
70.23   Flashing signals
   
70.24   Pedestrian walk and wait signals
   
70.25   Unauthorized signs, signals and the like
   
70.26   Defacing or injuring devices and the like
   
70.27   Certain roadways designated “not for through traffic”
Motorcycles, Bicycles and Toy Vehicles
   
70.35   Roller skates, coasters, and the like on roadway
   
70.36   More than one person riding motorcycle, bicycle and the like
   
70.37   Riding recreational equipment/vehicles on sidewalk
   
70.38   Light and reflector for bicycles
Pedestrians
   
70.50   Application of title
   
70.51   Right-of-way in crosswalks
   
70.52   Use of crosswalks; crossing between intersection
   
70.53   Roadway to be crossed at right angles; exception
   
70.54   Walking on roadways
   
70.55   Hitchhikers not to stand in roadway
   
70.56   Duty of drivers with regard to pedestrians
Administration and Enforcement
   
70.65   Regulations of Chief of Police and City Manager
   
70.66   Duty of police to enforce title
   
70.67   Authority of police to direct traffic
   
70.68   Authority of fire department officers to direct traffic
   
70.69   Obedience to traffic officers
   
70.70   Traffic Safety Coordinator; powers and duties; traffic register
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Ambulances, see
Ch. 110
   Moving of buildings, see §§
150.090 et seq.
   Power of city to control the operation of vehicles, see Charter §
2.1(c)(12)
   Railroads, see
Ch. 73
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 99
   Taxis; buses, see
Ch. 117
   Wreckers, see
Ch. 119
Statutory reference:
   Uniform Traffic Act, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. Any roadway set apart for public travel, but not named on the
official map as a street.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire Department (fire patrol),
police vehicles, public and private ambulances for which permits have been
issued by the State Board of Health, such emergency vehicles of municipal
departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by
the City Council, private vehicles operated by volunteer firefighters or
certified Emergency Medical Services employees or volunteers while answering a
fire alarm or responding to a medical emergency, industrial ambulances and
other industrial emergency response vehicles when operating in an emergency
situation provided the vehicle is also operated with criteria established by
the state Industrial Fire Training Board of the state Firemen's and Fire
Marshals' Association as the criteria are in effect on September 1, 1989, and
vehicles operated by blood banks or tissue banks, accredited or approved under
federal or state laws, while making emergency deliveries of blood, drugs or
medicine, or organs.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a roadway when,
within any 600 feet along such roadway, there are buildings in use for business
or industrial purposes which occupy 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300
feet collectively on both sides of the roadway.
   CROSSWALK. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway. The word “crosswalk” also includes any portion of a
roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian
crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
   FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers.
   HAND SIGNALS. All signa]s made by the operator by use of the hand and
forearm for the purpose of indicating his intention of turning, stopping, or
changing the course of the vehicle.
   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines or, if none, when the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two highways which join one another at or approximately at right angles, or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any
other angle may come in conflict. Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet
or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by
an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the
event such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more
apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded
as a separate intersection.
   LEGAL HOLIDAYS. New Year's Day, Memorial Day, U.S. Independence Day, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve Day, Christmas Day, and Martin Luther King
Day.
   LOADING ZONE. A space or section of the curb and adjacent street set aside
far exclusive use of loading or unloading of persons, merchandise, supplies and
materials.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which
is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and devices,
not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of a public
body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of guiding, directing,
warning or regulating traffic.
   OPERATOR or DRIVER. Any person who is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a roadway,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading, or in obedience of traffic regulations or traffic signs
and signals.
   PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE. A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the Police Department of the city or any
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
   PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership and used
for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner but not by other persons.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the street or highway.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a highway includes two or
more separate roadways, the term “roadway” shall refer to any such roadway
separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every
public way pub-licly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other
conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of
travel.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically, or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop or to
proceed.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a public highway, excepting devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
('68 Code, § 27-1) (Ord. 3-1978-12, passed 3-14-78; Am. Ord. 12-1983-47, passed
12-13-83)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, §§ 1 through 20H
§ 70.02 VEHICLE EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle on any street,
alley or other public way in the city, unless such vehicle is equipped in
accord with all state laws governing vehicles, particularly Tex. Rev. Civ.
Stat., Art. 6701d, §§ 108 through 139a, or to fail to use such equipment as
required by such laws, or to use any equipment contrary to such laws.
('68 Code, § 27-7)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.03 RIDING ON PORTION OF VEHICLE NOT INTENDED FOR PASSENGERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any portion of any vehicle
not designated or intended for the use of passengers when such vehicle is in
motion. This provision does not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary
discharge of his duty nor to persons riding within truck bodies intended for
merchandise.
('68 Code, § 27-8)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.04 DUTY TO STOP IN EVENT OF ACCIDENT.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in
damage to another vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall
immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as close
thereto as possible, and give his name, address and the registration number of
vehicle he is driving and shall, upon request and if available, exhibit his
license to operate the class of vehicle he is driving.
   (B)   The driver of any vehicle which is involved in an accident resulting
in damage to any other vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop his
vehicle and then and there either locate the operator or owner of such damaged
vehicle and notify such operator or owner of his name and address or shall
leave, in a conspicuous place in or attached to, and plainly visible, the
vehicle struck, a written notice giving the name and address of the driver and
of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a statement of the
circumstances thereof.
('68 Code, § 27-12)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Duty of driver in event of accident resulting in death or personal injury,
see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, §§ 38 and 40
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, §§ 39 and 41
§ 70.05 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to
or death of any person, or property damage to an apparent extent of $25 or
more, shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, either verbal
or written, give notice of such accident to the Police Department, if such
accident occurs within this city.
   (B)   The Police Department shall receive and properly file all accident
reports made to it under state law or under this section, but all such accident
reports made by drivers shall be for the confidential use of the Police
Department, and no such report shall be admissible in any civil or criminal
proceedings other than upon request of the person making such report or upon
request of the court having jurisdiction to prove a compliance with the law
requiring the making of such report.
   (C)   The Police Department shall maintain a suitable system of filing
traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be
filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use
and information of the Chief of Police.
('68 Code, § 27-13)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to require accident reports, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat.,
Art. 6701d, § 49
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 43
§ 70.06 APPLICATION OF TITLE TO DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the U.S. Government, this state, county or
city, and it shall be unlawful for any such operator to violate any of the
provisions of this title, except as otherwise permitted in this title or by
state statutes.
('68 Code, § 27-14)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 24(f)
§ 70.07 APPLICATION OF TITLE TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, the provisions of this title regulating the
operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency
vehicles, except that a driver, when operating any such vehicle in an emergency
or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law,
except when otherwise directed by a police officer, may:
      (1)   Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this title.
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
      (3)   Disregard regulations governing directions of movement or turning
in specified directions so long as he does not endanger life or property.
   (B)   The exemption granted above shall apply only when the driver of the
vehicle sounds a siren, bell, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably
necessary, or the vehicle displays a lighted red lamp visible from the front as
a warning to others.
('68 Code, § 27-15) (Ord. 2-1975-6, passed 2-11-75)
Statutory reference:
   Exemption of authorized emergency vehicles from certain traffic regulations,
see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 24
§ 70.08 APPLICATION OF TITLE TO PERSONS PROPELLING PUSHCARTS, RIDING ANIMALS
AND THE LIKE.
   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding any animal upon a roadway,
and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this title applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions which, by their very nature, can have no application.
('68 Code, § 27-16)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Cross-reference:
   Animals, see
Ch. 91
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 25
§ 70.09 MOTOR VEHICLES: RACING MOTOR; SUDDEN STARTS OR STOPS; UNNECESSARY HORN
BLOWING; AUXILIARY OR COMPRESSION ENGINE BRAKES.
   The following activities are prohibited and subject to the penalty set forth
in §
70.99:
   (A)   Accelerating or racing the motor of a vehicle from a sudden start or
stop so as to cause a loud noise in a manner calculated to disturb the person
or persons present;
   (B)   Bringing a motor vehicle to a sudden start or stop or blowing the horn
when no necessity for the protection of the driver or the property exists in a
manner calculated to disturb the person or persons present.
   (C)   The use or operation of an auxiliary or compression engine brake,
commonly referred to as a "Jacobs" or "Jake Brake", which produces any noise in
addition to the normal operating engine noise, shall be prohibited within the
city.
      (1)   This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the use of such
braking mechanism by emergency vehicles while in the performance of their
official or normal duties.
      (2)   This provision is not intended to prohibit the passage of vehicles
equipped with engine or Jake Brakes in posted areas, but rather prohibit the
use of such equipment in posted areas.
('68 Code, § 19-19.2) (Ord. passed 1-13-70; Am. Ord. 7-1991-21, passed 7-25-91;
Am. Ord. 04-2005-28, passed 4-26-05)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.10 MOTOR VEHICLES: ACCELERATING OR OPERATING IN MANNER THAT CAUSES TIRES
TO BREAK TRACTION OR TO LEAVE THE PAVEMENT.
   (A)   The following activities are prohibited and subject to the penalty set
forth in §
70.99.
      (1)   Accelerating or operating a motor vehicle in any manner which
causes the tires to break traction with the pavement; or
      (2)   Accelerating or operating a motor vehicle in any manner which
causes one or more tires to leave the pavement while the motor vehicle is in
motion.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall apply to a motor vehicle operated
on any street, alley or other public way within the jurisdiction of the city,
and to a motor vehicle operated on any private property within the jurisdiction
of the city that is open to members of the general public and is not part of an
auto racing facility approved by the city.
(Ord. 10-2001-78, passed 10-9-01; Am. Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27- 18)
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.11 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   A motor vehicle is abandoned if the motor vehicle:
      (1)   Is inoperable, is more than five years old and has been left
unattended on public property for more than 48 hours;
      (2)   Has remained illegally on public property for more than 48 hours;
      (3)   Has remained on private property without the consent of the owner
or person in charge of the property for more than 48 hours;
      (4)   Has been left unattended on the right-of-way of a designated
county, state, or federal highway for more than 48 hours;
      (5)   Has been left unattended for more than 24 hours on the right-of-way
of a turnpike project constructed and maintained by the Texas Turnpike
Authority division of the Texas Department of Transportation or a controlled
access highway; or
      (6)   Is considered an abandoned motor vehicle under Tex. Trans. Code §
644.153(r).
   (B)   In this section, CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY has the meaning assigned by
Tex. Trans. Code § 541.302.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, park, or stand any
vehicle, truck, trailer, recreational vehicle or other personal property upon
any public property or right-of-way in such a manner as to block the flow of
traffic. The city shall have the authority to immediately remove or caused to
be removed any items left on public property or right-of-way that is an
obstruction to traffic.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 70.12 AUTHORITY TO TAKE ABANDONED VEHICLE INTO CUSTODY.
   (A)   A law enforcement agency may take into custody an abandoned motor
vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, or outboard motor found on public or private
property.
   (B)   A law enforcement agency may use agency personnel, equipment, and
facilities or contract for other personnel, equipment, and facilities to
remove, preserve, store, send notice regarding, and dispose of an abandoned
motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, or outboard motor taken into custody by
the agency under this subchapter.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 70.13 TAKING ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE INTO CUSTODY: NOTICE.
   (A)   A law enforcement agency shall send notice of abandonment to:
      (1)   The last known registered owner of each motor vehicle, aircraft,
watercraft, or outboard motor taken into custody by the agency or for which a
report is received under Tex. Trans. Code § 683.031; and
      (2)   Each lienholder of record:
         (a)   Under Tex. Trans. Code Ch. 501 for the motor vehicle;
         (b)   With the Federal Aviation Administration or the Secretary of
State for the aircraft; or
         (c)   Under Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code, Ch. 31 for the watercraft or
outboard motor.
   (B)   A law enforcement agency that takes into custody an aircraft shall
contact the Federal Aviation Administration in the manner described by Tex.
Trans. Code § 22.901 to attempt to identify the owner of the aircraft before
sending the notice required by division (A).
   (C)   The notice under division (A) must:
      (1)   Be sent by certified mail not later than the tenth day after the
date the agency:
         (a)   Takes the abandoned motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, or
outboard motor into custody; or
         (b)   Receives the report under Tex. Trans. Code § 683.031;
      (2)   Specify the year, make, model, and identification number of the
item;
      (3)   Give the location of the facility where the item is being held;
      (4)   Inform the owner and lienholder of the right to claim the item not
later than the twentieth day after the date of the notice on payment of:
         (a)   Towing, preservation, and storage charges; or
         (b)   Garagekeeper's charges and fees under Tex. Trans. Code § 683.032
and, if the vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle impounded under Tex. Trans.
Code 644.153(q), the delinquent administrative penalty and costs; and
      (5)   State that failure of the owner or lienholder to claim the item
during the period specified by division (C)(4) is:
         (a)   A waiver by that person of all right, title, and interest in the
item; and
         (b)   Consent to the sale of the item at a public auction.
   (D)   Notice by publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the
area where the motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, or outboard motor was
abandoned is sufficient notice under this section if:
      (1)   The identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined;
      (2)   The registration has no address for the owner; or
      (3)   The determination with reasonable certainty of the identity and
address of all lienholders is impossible.
   (E)   Notice by publication:
      (1)   Must be published in the same period that is required by division
(C) for notice by certified mail and contain all of the information required by
that subsection; and
      (2)   May contain a list of more than one abandoned motor vehicle,
aircraft, watercraft, or outboard motor.
   (F)   A law enforcement agency is not required to send a notice, as
otherwise required by division (A), if the agency has received notice from a
vehicle storage facility that an application has or will be submitted to the
Texas Department of Motor Vehicles for the disposal of the vehicle.
   (G)   In addition to the notice required under division (A), if a law
enforcement agency takes an abandoned motor vehicle into custody, the agency
shall notify any person who has filed a theft report or similar report prepared
by any law enforcement agency for the vehicle of that fact. The notice must be
sent by regular mail on the next business day after the agency takes the
vehicle into custody. The law enforcement agency shall also provide the name
and address of the person that filed the theft report or similar report to the
vehicle storage facility or governmental vehicle storage facility that is
storing the vehicle.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 70.14 STORAGE, AUCTION, PROCEEDS AND USE OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   The storage, auction, proceeds from auction and use of abandoned vehicles
shall comply with Tex. Trans. Code §§ 683.013, 683.014, 683.015, and 683.016.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.15 CONFORMITY WITH STATE HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT.
   All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual
and specifications approved by the State Highway Department. All signs and
signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall, so far as
practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All
traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of
state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices.
('68 Code, § 27-61)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of traffic-control devices,
see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, §§ 27(a)(2) and 31
§ 70.16 COUNCIL TO DESIGNATE LOCATION.
   The City Council shall by resolution, designate the location where traffic-
control signs, signals and devices shall be installed.
('68 Code, § 27-62)
§ 70.17 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   The Director of Public Works shall install and maintain or cause to be
installed and maintained all official traffic signs, signals and devices at
locations prescribed by the City Council.
('68 Code, § 27-63)
§ 70.18 DESIGNATION AND MAINTENANCE OF CROSSWALKS.
   The Director of Public Works is authorized to establish, designate and
maintain, or cause to be maintained, by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his
opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at
such other places as he may deem necessary.
('68 Code, § 27-64)
§ 70.19 MARKING TRAFFIC LANES.
   The Director of Public Works is authorized to mark lanes for traffic on
street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with the
provisions of this chapter.
('68 Code, § 27-65)
§ 70.20 OBEDIENCE TO DEVICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any operator or driver of any vehicle of any kind
to disobey the instruction of any official traffic-control sign, signal or
device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted by §
70.07.
('68 Code, § 27-66)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 32
§ 70.21 NECESSITY OF SIGNS.
   No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced
against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation,
the required sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen
by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state
that signs are required, such section shall be effective without signs being
erected to give notice thereof.
('68 Code, § 27-67)
§ 70.22 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND GENERALLY.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the
words “Go,” “Caution” or “Stop,” or exhibiting different colored lights
successively one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be
used and such term and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles
and pedestrians as follows:
   (A)   Green alone or “Go.”
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or
turn right or left, unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But
vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
   (B)   Yellow alone or “Caution” when shown following the green or “Go”
signal.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red
or “Stop” signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular
traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or “Stop”
signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is
insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to
cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
   (C)   Red alone or “Stop.”
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or “Go” is
shown alone; provided that, after stopping and yielding to all pedestrians and
vehicles, the driver of a vehicle may enter the intersection for the purpose of
making a right turn only, if a sign is in place indicating that such turn can
be legally made.
      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Red with green arrow.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, but shall yield
the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other
traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
   (E)   Other locations. In the event an official traffic-control signal is
erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of
this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which, by their
nature, can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or
marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the
absence of any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
('68 Code, § 27-68)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 33
§ 70.23 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked and the
right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop
at a stop sign.
   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
('68 Code, § 27-69)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 35
§ 70.24 PEDESTRIAN WALK AND WAIT SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “Walk” or
“Wait” are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows:
   (A)   Walk.  Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway
in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the
drivers of all vehicles.
   (B)   Wait. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction
of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on
the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the wait
signal is showing.
('68 Code, § 27-70)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 34
§ 70.25 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
road, street or highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which
purports to be or is an imitation or resembles an official traffic-control
device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
official traffic-control device or any railroad signal or sign, and no person
shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway
or street any traffic signal or sign bearing thereon any commercial
advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection, upon private
property adjacent to streets or highways, of signs giving useful directional
information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signals.
   (B)   Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance, and the Chief of Police is empowered to remove the same or
cause it to be removed without notice.
('68 Code, § 27-71)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 36
§ 70.26 DEFACING OR INJURING DEVICES AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully deface, injure, move,
obstruct, or interfere with any official traffic-control sign, signal or
device.
('68 Code, § 27-72)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Cross-reference:
   Damaging public property generally, §
130.02
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 37
§ 70.27 CERTAIN ROADWAYS DESIGNATED “NOT FOR THROUGH TRAFFIC.”
   (A)   Certain traffic ways within the city are for specifically designated
purposes. These routes shall be identified by the City Council as “not for
through traffic.” This designation means that the traffic way is to be utilized
for its intended purpose. Each traffic way that is designated as “not for
through traffic” shall be marked as such at each entrance point with a sign.
      (1)   All Star Parkway is hereby designated as “not for through traffic.”
This roadway is designed to be utilized by those persons utilizing and/or
visiting the City Sports Complex.
      (2)   All roadways located within the boundaries of cemeteries located
within the city are designated as “not for through traffic.” These roadways are
designed to be utilized for cemetery use only.
   (B)   Traffic ways include but are not limited to roadways, alleys,
driveways, and other paths designed for use by vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. 1-2008-03, passed 1-8-08)
Penalty, see § 70.99
MOTORCYCLES, BICYCLES AND TOY VEHICLES
§ 70.35 ROLLER SKATES, COASTERS, AND THE LIKE ON ROADWAY.
   No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, skate
board, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while
crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing, such person shall be
granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable
to pedestrians.
('68 Code, § 27-9)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.36 MORE THAN ONE PERSON RIDING MOTORCYCLE, BICYCLE AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorcycle, motor
scooter or bicycle, which is designed or constructed to carry but one person,
on the streets and public places in the city, when more than one person is
riding on such vehicle.
   (B)   Any motorcycle, motor scooter or bicycle which is designed or
constructed to carry the operator and one or more other persons at the same
time shall be subject to the inspection of the Police Department, to determine
the safety of such vehicle for the riders thereof, before such vehicle can be
ridden by more than one person at the same time, on the streets and public
places of this city.
('68 Code, § 27-9.1) (Ord. passed 6-14-60)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.37 RIDING RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT/VEHICLES ON SIDEWALK.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive any recreational
equipment or recreational vehicle upon any sidewalk within this city, except
for areas of driveway access.
('68 Code, § 27-10) (Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.38 LIGHT AND REFLECTOR FOR BICYCLES.
   Every bicycle ridden within the city limits shall have a light on the front
thereof and a reflector on the back and the same shall be in working order and
turned on when ridden at night.
('68 Code, § 27-11) (Ord. passed 12-12-67)
Penalty, see § 70.99
PEDESTRIANS
§ 70.50 APPLICATION OF TITLE.
   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as provided in this
chapter, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and
be subject to the restrictions stated in this title.
('68 Code, § 27-148)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.51 RIGHT-OF-WAY IN CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk,
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave
a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle,
which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield.
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
('68 Code, § 27-149)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 77
§ 70.52 USE OF CROSSWALKS; CROSSING BETWEEN INTERSECTION.
   (A)   All crossings by any pedestrian of any intersection within the
corporate limits of the city shall be made within the crosswalks of such
intersection.
   (B)   It shall be lawful for a pedestrian to cross a street at any place
other than an intersection, but when any such crossing is made or being made by
any pedestrian he shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon such street
approaching such place of crossing and in proximity thereto. It shall be
unlawful for any pedestrians to cause any vehicle to stop or for such
pedestrians to cause any interference with the movements of any vehicle by
reason of such crossing at such place.
('68 Code, § 27-150)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.53 ROADWAY TO BE CROSSED AT RIGHT ANGLES; EXCEPTION.
   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except
in a crosswalk.
('68 Code, § 27-151)
§ 70.54 WALKING ON ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a street or highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of
the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction.
('68 Code, § 27-152)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 81
§ 70.55 HITCHHIKERS NOT TO STAND IN ROADWAY.
   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from
the driver of any vehicle.
('68 Code, § 27-153)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 81
§ 70.56 DUTY OF DRIVERS WITH REGARD TO PEDESTRIANS.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subchapter, every driver of
a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon
any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and
shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway.
('68 Code, § 27-154)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 79
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.65 REGULATIONS OF CHIEF OF POLICE AND CITY MANAGER.
   The Chief of Police and the City Manager are empowered to make and enforce
regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this title and to
make and enforce temporary traffic regulations to cover emergency or special
conditions.
('68 Code, § 27-2)
§ 70.66 DUTY OF POLICE TO ENFORCE TITLE.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to enforce the provisions of
this title.
('68 Code, § 27-3)
§ 70.67 AUTHORITY OF POLICE TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   Officers of the Police Department are authorized to direct all traffic,
either in person or by means of visible or audible signal, in conformance with
the provisions of this title. In the event of a fire or other emergency, or to
expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department
may direct traffic, as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions
of this title.
('68 Code, § 27-4)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of police officers, see Tex.
Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 27(a)(2)
§ 70.68 AUTHORITY OF FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICERS TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or
assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
('68 Code, § 27-5)
§ 70.69 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC OFFICERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to or fail to comply
with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer or Fire
Department official given to direct or control traffic as authorized in this
title.
   (B)   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction to stop and yield to pedestrians given by any school
crossing guard while in the performance of his or her duties in a designated
school crosswalk.
('68 Code, § 27-6)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 23
§ 70.70 TRAFFIC SAFETY COORDINATOR; POWERS AND DUTIES; TRAFFIC REGISTER.
   (A)   The Traffic Safety Coordinator of the city is charged with the
responsibility of maintenance of all official traffic controls, devices and
regulations and in addition thereto, the Traffic Safety Coordinator is
authorized:
      (1)   To determine and establish school zones, fire zones, no-parking
zones, regulatory devices, signs and signals, save and except traffic signal
lights and speed limit zones, and all other traffic-control devices as shall be
deemed necessary for the public safety and welfare or to regulate, warn or
guide traffic for the safe and expeditious flow thereof.
      (2)   To place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals (save and
except traffic signal lights and speed limit zones) and devices when and as
required under the provisions contained in this section to make effective the
provisions of this section.
   (B)   The Traffic Safety Coordinator is authorized to make and enforce
temporary or experimental devices to cover emergency or special conditions. No
such temporary or experimental devices shall remain in effect more than 90
days. The Traffic Safety Coordinator may test traffic-control devices under
actual conditions of traffic.
   (C)   Whenever the Traffic Safety Coordinator determines there is a
necessity for the erection, removal or change of any traffic-control device or
regulation, such determination shall be based upon a traffic and engineering
survey, conducted upon the following standards:
      (1)   The public welfare, including safety and traffic factors to insure
the safe and expeditious flow of traffic shall be considered.
      (2)   The development of the property surrounding the proposed area shall
be analyzed.
      (3)   The requirements of vehicular traffic flow in the proposed area
shall be determined.
      (4)   The amount of pedestrian and vehicular traffic in the proposed area
shall be considered.
      (5)   If at any time the council finds that these guidelines were not
followed and/or specified warrants were not sufficiently met, it may by
resolution remove any so established traffic regulatory sign or signs.
   (D)   The public record, which shall be called the traffic register, shall
contain a record of every specific location in the city where any traffic-
control device marking or special regulation is made applicable. The City
Council finds that the conditions prerequisite to the establishment of all
special traffic regulations prescribed in this title, and the installation of
all traffic-control devices, signs, signals in and marking evidenced by the
record thereof in the traffic register, exist, and such findings are confirmed
and such regulations shall continue in operation until modified as provided in
this code of ordinances. The traffic register shall be continuously maintained
by the City Clerk as provided in this title, and all persons shall be charged
with notice of the contents of the same.
('68 Code, § 27-17) (Ord. 12-1974-50, passed 12-10-74; Am. Ord. 1-1975-4,
passed 1-14-75)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person who violates the provisions of this title for
which no other penalty is set forth shall be deemed guilty of a Class C
misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
('68 Code, § 27-18(a)) (Ord. 3-1978-12, passed 3-14-78; Am. Ord. 7-1991-21,
passed 7-25-91; Am. Ord. 6-1994-32, passed 6-23-94; Am. Ord. 1-2008-03, passed
1-8-08; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
   (B)   School speed zones. Any person who violates any provision of Traffic
Schedule I shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be fined in any sum not more than $500.
(Ord. 8-2002-57, passed 8-13-02)
   (C)   Standing in passenger curb loading zone. Any person who violates any
provision of §
72.29 shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor punishable by fine of not less
than $5 and not more than $500.
('68 Code, § 27-122(b)) (Ord. 12-1983-47, passed 12-13-83; Am. Ord. 7-1991-21,
passed 7-25-91)
   (D)   Parking offenses.
      (1)   General. Each hour that a vehicle is parked in violation of any
provisions of this title constitutes a separate and distinct offense.
('68 Code, § 27-18(b)) (Ord. 3-1978-12, passed 3-14-78; Am. Ord. 7-1991-21,
passed 7-25-91)
      (2)   Minimum guidelines for parking meter violations on south side of
courthouse. Parking meters on the south side of the courthouse on Chambers
Street from Main to Caddo shall be specifically designated as one-hour parking
meters. Vehicles can park in these areas a maximum of one hour in duration.
Violation of this provision will result in the issuance of a parking meter
citation, and a minimum fine of $7.50 will be assessed.
('68 Code, § 27-138) (Ord. 5-1985, passed 5-20-85; Am. Ord. 7-1994-36, passed
7-12-94)
   (E)   Hand-held mobile telephones. Any person violating any of the
provisions of §
71.29 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall
be fined in any sum not more than $200.
(Ord. 09-2009-57, passed 9-22-09; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Duty to drive on right half of roadway
   
71.02   Passing vehicle — proceeding in same direction
   
71.03   Passing vehicle — duty of driver of overtaken vehicle
   
71.04   Passing vehicle — on right side
   
71.05   Passing vehicle — proceeding in opposite direction
   
71.06   Operation of vehicle on improved shoulder
   
71.07   Stopping and turning signals
   
71.08   Stopping and turning signals — manner of giving with hand and arm
   
71.09   Right-of-way at intersections
   
71.10   Right-of-way when turning left
   
71.11   Stop intersections
   
71.12   Yield intersections
   
71.13   Emerging from alley, driveway or building
   
71.14   One-way streets and alleys
   
71.15   Procedure upon approach of authorized emergency vehicle
   
71.16   Procedure when meeting or overtaking stopped school bus
   
71.17   Obstructing traffic
   
71.18   Obstructing intersection or crosswalk
   
71.19   Following too closely
   
71.20   Following fire apparatus or driving near scene of fire
   
71.21   Driving over fire hose
   
71.22   Driving between vehicles in procession
   
71.23   Driving within sidewalk area
   
71.24   Reckless driving
   
71.25   Truck routes
   
71.26   Collision with parked vehicles and fixtures
   
71.27   Continuous two-way left turn lane
   
71.28   Turning movements
   
71.29   Use of hand-held mobile telephones prohibited in school zones
Speed Regulations
   
71.40   Maximum limits
   
71.41   Maximum limit in school zones
   
71.411   School zones adopted
   
71.42   Maximum limits on specific streets
   
71.43   Racing prohibited
   
71.44   Minimum limits
   
71.45   Exemptions from speed regulations
   
71.46   Construction zones on state-maintained highways
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 DUTY TO DRIVE ON RIGHT HALF OF ROADWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle shall drive on the right half of the roadway, except
when overtaking and passing a vehicle proceeding in the same direction under
the rules established in this chapter, and except when the right half of the
roadway is closed to traffic by the proper authorities, and except upon a
roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under the rules
applicable thereon or upon a roadway designated and sign posted for one-way
traffic.
('68 Code, § 27-27)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 52
§ 71.02 PASSING VEHICLE — PROCEEDING IN SAME DIRECTION.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
71.04, the driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the street until safely clear of the overtaken
vehicle. No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
street in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing
to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction of any vehicle overtaken. In
every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-band side of the
street before coming within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction.
   (B)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left of the street for
the purpose of passing a vehicle proceeding in the same direction when
approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade
crossing or when approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel.
('68 Code, § 27-28)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, §§ 54, 56, 57
§ 71.03 PASSING VEHICLE — DUTY OF DRIVER OF OVERTAKEN VEHICLE.
   It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle, upon audible signal that he
is about to be overtaken on the left, to give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle and he shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until
completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
('68 Code, § 27-29)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 54(b)
§ 71.04 PASSING VEHICLE — ON RIGHT SIDE.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of a
vehicle proceeding in the same direction only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the overtaken vehicle is making or about to make a left turn;
      (2)   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by
parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving traffic in
each direction.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle on the
right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled
portion of the street.
('68 Code, § 27-30)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 55
§ 71.05 PASSING VEHICLE — PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTION.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right and, upon streets having width for not more than one line of
traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-
half of the main-traveled portion of the street, as nearly as possible.
('68 Code, § 27-31)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 53
§ 71.06 OPERATION OF VEHICLE ON IMPROVED SHOULDER.
   (A)   A driver may operate a vehicle on an improved shoulder to the right of
the main travelled portion of the roadway as long as necessary and when the
operation may be done in safety only under the following circumstances:
      (1)   To stop, stand or park;
      (2)   To accelerate prior to entering the main travelled lane of traffic;
      (3)   To decelerate prior to making a right turn;
      (4)   To overtake and pass another vehicle that is slowing or stopped on
the main travelled portion of the highway, disabled or preparing to make a left
turn;
      (5)   To allow other vehicles to pass that are traveling at a greater
speed;
      (6)   When permitted or required by an official traffic control device;
or
      (7)   At any time to avoid a collision.
   (B)   A driver may operate a vehicle on the improved shoulder to the left of
the main traveled portion of a divided or controlled-access highway when the
operation may be done in safety only under the following conditions:
      (1)   To slow or stop when the vehicle is disabled and traffic or other
circumstances prohibit the safe movement of the vehicle to the shoulder to the
right of the main traveled portion of the roadway;
      (2)   When permitted or required by an official traffic control device;
or
      (3)   To avoid a collision.
   (C)   The provisions of this section limiting the operation of vehicles on
improved shoulders shall not apply to:
      (1)   Authorized emergency vehicles responding to calls;
      (2)   Police patrols;
      (3)   Vehicles and equipment actually engaged in work upon a highway but
shall not apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such
word; or
      (4)   Bicycles.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 54A
§ 71.07 STOPPING AND TURNING SIGNALS.
   (A)   When any other traffic may be affected by such movement, no person
shall turn any vehicle without giving a signal of his intention to turn right
or left. Such signal shall be given continuously during not less than the last
100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning.
   (B)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal to the driver of any vehicle
immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to give such signal.
   (C)   A stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given by means
of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or mechanical signal device of a type
approved by the state department of public safety; provided however, that when
the body of a vehicle or the body and load of a vehicle projects 24 inches or
more to the left of the center of the steering wheel, or under any condition
when a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of
the vehicle, the vehicle must be equipped with and the signals must be given by
such turn-indicating lamp or device.
('68 Code, § 27-33)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, §§ 68 and 69
§ 71.08 STOPPING AND TURNING SIGNALS — MANNER OF GIVING WITH HAND AND ARM.
   All signals required by §
71.07, when given by hand and arm, shall be given from the left side of the
vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows:
   (A)   Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally.
   (B)   Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward, except that a bicycle
operator may signal from the right side of the vehicle with hand and arm
extended horizontally.
   (C)   Stop or decrease speed. Hand and arm extended downward.
('68 Code, § 27-34)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 70
§ 71.09 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
street or highway. When two vehicles enter an intersection which is not
controlled by a traffic sign or device from different streets at approximately
the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-
way to the vehicle on the right.
   (B)   When two vehicles approach one another on the same street going in
opposite directions and the driver of one of the vehicles desires to turn off
such street, the vehicle which continues on the street in the original
direction has the right-of-way over the turning vehicle. In the event both
drivers desire to turn off, then the vehicle turning to the right has the
right-of-way over the vehicle turning to the left.
('68 Code, § 27-35)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, §§ 71 and 72
§ 71.10 RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute
an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded and having given a
signal when and as required by this title, may make such left turn, and the
drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite
direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn.
('68 Code, § 27-36)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 72
§ 71.11 STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   The City Council may, by resolution, designate any street intersection as a
stop intersection and designate the streets upon which vehicles shall stop
before entering such intersection. Whenever any intersection has been so
designated, the Director of Public Works shall cause the same to be identified
by the erection of stop signs indicating which vehicles approaching the
intersection shall stop, and it shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle
approaching such a sign to bring such vehicle to a complete stop at such sign
or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection, except when
directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic-control signal. After
having so stopped, such driver shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles
which have entered the intersection or which are approaching so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard. Such driver, after having so yielded, may
proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching on the intersecting
street shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle go proceeding into or across
the intersection.
('68 Code, § 27-37)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to designate stop intersections, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat.,
Art. 6701d, §§ 27(a)(6) and 91(a)
   Duty of drivers with respect to stop signs, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art.
6701d, §§ 73 and 91
§ 71.12 YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
   The Director of Public Works, as authorized from time to time by resolution
of the City Council, may install and maintain yield right-of-way signs at
intersections. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield right-of-way sign,
shall, in obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the
existing conditions, or shall stop if necessary, and shall yield the right-of-
way to any pedestrian crossing the roadway on which he is driving and to any
vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another street so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
('68 Code, § 27-38)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.13 EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY OR BUILDING.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto a
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, yielding the right-of-
way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering
the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
roadway.
('68 Code, § 27-39)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 92
§ 71.14 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   Whenever any resolution of the City Council designates any one-way
street or alley, the Director of Public Works shall place and maintain signs
giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall. be effective unless such
signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement
shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
   (B)   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys which are
designated as one-way streets or alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in
the indicated direction where signs indicating the direction of traffic are
erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
('68 Code, § 27-40)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to designate one-way streets, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat.,
Art. 6701d, § 27(a)(4)
§ 71.15 PROCEDURE UPON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
equipped with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting red light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such
vehicle, or when the driver of such vehicle is giving audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to. and as
close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway, clear of any
intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer.
   (B)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of any authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway.
('68 Code, § 27-41) (Am. Ord. 2-1975-7, passed 2-11-75)
§ 71.16 PROCEDURE WHEN MEETING OR OVERTAKING STOPPED SCHOOL BUS.
   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway inside or outside of a business or
residence district upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school
bus which has stopped on the highway for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school children shall stop the vehicle before reaching the
school bus when there is in operation on the school bus a visual signal as
specified in Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 124, and the driver shall not
proceed until the school bus resumes motion or is signaled by the school bus
driver to proceed or the visual signals are no longer activated.
('68 Code, § 27-42)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 104
§ 71.17 OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.
   No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon any street in such
manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon.
('68 Code, § 27-43)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.18 OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
('68 Code, § 27-44)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.19 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the street traffic and conditions.
('68 Code, § 27-45)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 61(a)
§ 71.20 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS OR DRIVING NEAR SCENE OF FIRE.
   No driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall follow
any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet,
nor shall such driver drive into or park such vehicle within the block where
the fire apparatus has stopped to answer a fire alarm.
('68 Code, § 27-46)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 100
§ 71.21 DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   No driver of any vehicle shall drive over an unprotected hose of the Fire
Department when such hose has been laid down on any street or private driveway
to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire
Department official in command.
('68 Code, § 27-47)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 101
§ 71.22 DRIVING BETWEEN VEHICLES IN PROCESSION.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive between the
vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in
motion. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is
controlled by police officers.
('68 Code, § 27-48)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.23 DRIVING WITHIN SIDEWALK AREA.
   The operator of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at
permanent or temporary driveways.
('68 Code, § 27-49)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.24 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   Any person who drives any vehicle in willful or wanton disregard for the
safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving.
('68 Code, § 27-50)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 51.
§ 71.25 TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      LOCAL TRUCK. Any truck, as defined herein, other than a through truck, as
defined herein.
      THROUGH TRUCK. Trucks not having their origin, destination, pickup, or
delivery point within the city.
      TRUCK. A single-unit vehicle with a manufacturer's gross weight rating of
more than 10,000 pounds, a single-unit vehicle with tandem axles, or all truck-
tractor/semitrailer combinations.
   (B)   Truck routes designated. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive
or operate a through truck upon any street or highway within the city that has
not been designated as a truck route. For purposes of this provision, the
following are designated as the truck routes:
      (1)   US 67 (Bypass).
      (2)   SH 174 (Main/Caddo).
   (C)   Residential areas. In the event an operator of a local truck must use
city-maintained streets to arrive at their destination within the city, the
operator shall use every reasonable effort to select the route that will
minimize the use of city-maintained streets and residential areas.
   (D)   Presumption regarding violations. Any person operating any of the
aforesaid vehicles upon any street or highway that is not designated a truck
route as provided for by this section shall have in their possession for the
inspection of police officers their log book or evidence of their destination
and point of origin to justify the presence of said vehicle on a street or
highway other than a designated truck route. Failure to have such log book or
evidence in their possession shall not be an offense, but shall create a
presumption that such person is unlawfully operating one of the aforesaid
vehicles upon a street or roadway that is not designated a truck route.
   (E)   Exemptions. The driving of a truck upon a street or highway not
designated as a truck route in any of the following situations shall not
constitute a violation:
      (1)   The pickup or delivery of merchandise at a location not situated on
the designated truck route, provided the truck leaves and returns to the
designated truck route by the most direct route available.
      (2)   Traveling to or from a service or repair shop, provided the truck
leaves and returns to the designated truck route by the most direct route
available.
      (3)   For local trucks, traveling to or from a place where a truck can be
legally parked or stored while not in use, provided the truck leaves and
returns to the designated truck route by the most direct route available.
      (4)   A truck shall not be required to enter or exit directly onto the
designated truck route if such entry or exit would be unsafe from a traffic
safety standpoint as determined and as so designated by the city's Director of
Public Works.
      (5)   Operation of authorized emergency vehicles (as defined by Tex.
TRANS. Code § 541.201), school buses, church buses, and municipal and utility
service trucks on streets or highways that are not designated truck routes.
      (6)   Driving upon the Chisholm Trail Parkway in compliance with signage
posted by the North Texas Tollway Authority.
   (F)   Signs. Appropriate signs and markings shall be maintained advising the
truck operators of the designated streets and highways that constitute the
truck routes
('68 Code, § 27-51(a)-(c)) (Ord. 9-1977-36, passed 9-13-77; Am. Ord. 06-2004-
35, passed 6-8-04; Am. Ord. 04-2008-24, passed 4-22-08; Am. Ord. 08-2021-44,
passed 8-24-21; Am. Ord. 06-2023-41, passed 6-13-23)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.26 COLLISION WITH PARKED VEHICLES AND FIXTURES.
   No driver of a vehicle shall strike, collide with or damage a vehicle which
is lawfully parked along a public street or strike, collide with or damage a
street sign, traffic-control sign or device, fire hydrant, fence, vehicle,
mailbox, tree, building or other items or fixtures which are located along but
not in a public street.
('68 Code, § 27-52) (Ord. 9-1978-42, passed 9-12-78)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.27 CONTINUOUS TWO-WAY LEFT TURN LANE.
   (A)   Definition. A CONTINUOUS TWO-WAY LEFT TURN LANE is the center lane of
a roadway divided into five lanes which provides for the two-way movement of
traffic and is clearly marked or designated as a “left turn only” lane by
pavement markings or street signs.
   (B)   Distance traveled. No person shall drive a vehicle in a continuous
two-way left turn lane except in preparation for making a left turn from said
lane; provided that no person shall drive a vehicle in the lane a distance of
more than 200 feet.
   (C)   Speed. No person shall drive a vehicle in a continuous two-way left
turn lane at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the
conditions then existing having regard for the actual and potential hazards. A
speed in excess of 20 miles per hour in the lane shall be prima facie evidence
that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful.
   (D)   Right-of-way. The driver of a motor vehicle intending to enter a
continuous two-way left turn lane shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles
already in the center lane and shall not enter the lane until such movement can
be made with safety.
   (E)   Position in lane. The driver of a motor vehicle using a continuous
two-way left turn lane shall remove such vehicle completely from the adjacent
through lane of traffic and shall stop and yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle which is stopped within such lane and signaling for a left turn.
('68 Code, § 27-53) (Ord. 10-1978-49, passed 10-10-78)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.28 TURNING MOVEMENTS.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
   (A)   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as
close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (B)   The approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and, after entering
the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection
to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.
   (C)   The approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way
street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest
the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it
enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way
street shall be made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street
being entered upon leaving the intersection.
   (D)   Where both streets or roadways are one way, both the approach for a
left turn and left turn shall be made as close as practicable to the left-hand
curb or edge of the roadway.
('68 Code, § 27-32)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate turning at intersections, see Tex. Rev. Civ.
Stat., Art. 6701d, § 27(a)(8)
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 65
§ 71.29 USE OF HAND-HELD MOBILE TELEPHONES PROHIBITED IN SCHOOL ZONES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to drive or operate a motor vehicle
in a school zone on official school days, during the hours when school zones
are in effect, and when school zone signs and signs prohibiting hand-held
mobile telephone use are posted in place, while using a hand-held mobile
telephone to engage in a call or to create, send or read messages.
   (B)   The Traffic Safety Coordinator is authorized to install a sign, which
complies with the standards adopted by and as required by the Texas Department
of Transportation, at each school zone in order for the city to enforce this
section, as authorized by state law.
(Ord. 09-2009-57, passed 9-22-09) Penalty, see §
70.99
SPEED REGULATIONS
§ 71.40 MAXIMUM LIMITS.
   (A)   No person shall operate or drive any vehicle on any street within the
city at a greater speed than 30 miles per hour, unless signs are erected
designating another speed in accordance with this title.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, no person shall
drive a vehicle on a street at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent
under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then
existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to
avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the
street in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use
due care.
   (C)   The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of
division (B), drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching a hill
crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when a special
hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of
weather or street or highway conditions.
('68 Code, § 27-83)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Speed of vehicles in cities and authority of cities to alter prima facie
speed limits established by state law, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, §§
166 and 169
§ 71.41 MAXIMUM LIMIT IN SCHOOL ZONES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor
vehicle in a designated school zone while lights are flashing on posted school
zone speed limit signs on any day during the school year that school is in
session, at a speed in excess of the speed limit posted on said sign.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor
vehicle in a designated school zone between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 9:00
a.m. or between the hours of 2:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., on any day during the
school year that school is in session, at a speed in excess of the speed limit
posted on said sign.
   (C)   Signs giving notice of the speed limit and the time periods during
which it is in effect shall be in place and unobstructed before this section
may be enforced.
('68 Code, § 27-84(b)(part)) (Ord. 12-1977-54, passed 12-13-77; Am. Ord. 11-
1992-27, passed 11-10-92; Am. Ord. 11-1992-31, passed 11-24-92; Am. Ord. 12-
2019-72, passed 12-10-19) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.411 SCHOOL ZONES ADOPTED.
School Road Name & Location Speed Limit
School                            Road Name & Location              Speed Limit
Adams Elementary                  Fuller Road - from FM 2135 to 200 15 MPH
                                  feet west of school property line
                                  Westhill Drive - from Berkley
Coleman Elementary                Drive to 200 feet east of school  15 MPH
                                  property line
                                  Featherston Street - from
                                  Westhill Drive to 200 feet north  15 MPH
                                  of school property line
                                  Crestwood Drive - from
                                  Featherston Street to 200 feet    15 MPH
                                  west of Featherston Street
                                  Shady Creek Drive - from Westhill
                                  Drive to 200 feet south of        15 MPH
                                  Westhill Drive
Cooke Elementary                  Douglas Street - from Euclid      15 MPH
                                  Street to Phillips Street
                                  Phillips Street - from Virginia   15 MPH
                                  Place to Grand Street
                                  Joslin Street - from Phillips
                                  Street to 200 feet south of       15 MPH
                                  Phillips Street
                                  Dixon Street - from Phillips
                                  Street to 200 feet south of       15 MPH
                                  Phillips Street
Cleburne High School/Wheat Middle Colonial Drive - from 200 feet
School                            north of Harlin Drive to 200 feet 15 MPH
                                  south Woodard Avenue
                                  Harlin Drive - from 100 feet west
                                  of Woodward Avenue to North Nolan 15 MPH
                                  River Road
                                  North Nolan River Road - from 200
                                  feet north of Harlin Drive to 200 25 MPH
                                  feet south of school property
                                  line
                                  Woodard Avenue - from 200 feet
                                  west of school property line to   15 MPH
                                  100 feet south of Harlin Drive
                                  Whitefish Drive - from Woodard
                                  Avenue to 200 feet south of       15 MPH
                                  Woodard Avenue
Smith Middle School/ Gerard       Country Club Road - from Lindsey  30 MPH
Elementary                        Lane to Longfellow Lane
                                  Hyde Park Boulevard - from Murry
                                  Drive to 200 feet south of        15 MPH
                                  Country Club Road
                                  South Nolan River Road - from
                                  Country Club Road to 700 feet     15 MPH
                                  north of Country Club Road
                                  Marinwood Road - from South Nolan
                                  River Road to 200 feet west of    15 MPH
                                  South Nolan River Road
                                  Hix Road - from 250 feet west to
Irving Elementary                 200 feet east of school property  15 MPH
                                  line
 
(Ord. 12-2019-72, passed 12-10-19; Am. Ord. 07-2022-52, passed 7-12-22)
§ 71.42 MAXIMUM LIMITS ON SPECIFIC STREETS.
   (A)   The City Council may alter the maximum speed limit of 30 miles per
hour, as established by §
71.40, on any street or portion thereof within the city in accord with the
provisions of Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 169. Whenever signs are
posted giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit so established for a
particular street or portion thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to
drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of such limit.
   (B)   Nothing in this code of ordinances or the ordinance adopting this code
of ordinances shall be deemed to affect the validity of any ordinance
establishing speed limits on specific streets or highways and such ordinances
are hereby recognized as continuing in force and effect to the same extent as
if set out at length herein.
('68 Code, § 27-85)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.43 RACING PROHIBITED.
   Any person who shall race or engage in a contest for speed between motor
vehicles of any kind upon any public street or alley within the city shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. The fact that the actual speed attained by any
vehicle engaged in racing or a contest for speed is less than the prima facie
legal speed limit shall be no defense to a complaint of racing or engaging in a
contest for speed in violation of this section.
('68 Code, § 27-86)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.44 MINIMUM LIMITS.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed
is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
('68 Code, § 27-87)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 170(a)
§ 71.45 EXEMPTIONS FROM SPEED REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this title and any other ordinance of the city regulating
the speed of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles of the Fire Department when
responding to a call, nor to police patrols, nor to physicians or ambulances
when actually engaged in responding to emergency calls, nor to authorized
emergency vehicles.
('68 Code, § 27-88)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Cross-reference:
   Ambulances, see
Ch. 110
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 172
§ 71.46 CONSTRUCTION ZONES ON STATE-MAINTAINED HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   The Texas Department of Transportation is authorized to establish
reduced speed limits within construction zones on state highways within the
city limits of the city. Upon receipt of notice that such reduced speed limits
have been duly established by Texas Department of Transportation Minute Order,
the Chief of Police is authorized to enforce compliance of vehicular traffic
movement within such construction zones, provided that signs giving notice of
reduced speed limits are in place and unobstructed prior to enforcement.
   (B)   All persons operating motor vehicles within a construction zone on
state-maintained highways within the limits of the city shall operate the
vehicles within the speed limit duly established for such zone pursuant to this
section and Texas Department of Transportation Commission Minute Order.
('68 Code, § 27-89) (Ord. 11-1992-26, passed 11-10-92)
Penalty, see § 70.99
CHAPTER 72: STOPPING, STANDING
AND PARKING
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Unattended vehicles
   
72.02   Prohibited in specified places
   
72.03   Ten feet of roadway to be left available for traffic
   
72.04   Designation and marking of areas where parking is prohibited or limited
   
72.05   Parking in prohibited areas; overtime parking
   
72.06   Parallel and angle parking
   
72.07   Limitation on parking between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   
72.08   Parking for displaying vehicle for sale prohibited
   
72.09   Parking for display of advertising prohibited
   
72.10   Bus stops
   
72.11   Impoundment of illegally parked vehicles
   
72.12   Owner presumed violator
   
72.13   Residential parking restrictions
   
72.14   One-hour parking zones
   
72.15   Handicapped parking spaces
   
72.16   Recreational equipment and construction equipment
   
72.17   Enforcement
Loading Zones
   
72.25   Loading and unloading — general provisions
   
72.26   Basic requirements for establishment of loading zones
   
72.27   Marking of zones
   
72.28   Standing in freight curb loading zone
   
72.29   Standing in passenger curb loading zone
Fire Lanes
   
72.75   Fire lanes established; parking prohibited
 
   
72.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Off-street parking requirements of zoning regulations, see §
155.54
   Parking vehicles at airport, see §
90.016
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate standing and parking of vehicles, see Tex.
Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 27(a)(1)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
   No person having control or charge of any motor vehicle shall allow such
vehicle to stand on any street unattended without first setting the brakes
thereon and stopping the motor of such vehicle, and when standing upon a
perceptible grade, without turning the front wheels of such vehicle to the curb
or the side of the street or highway.
('68 Code, § 27-99)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.02 PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park
such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police
officer or traffic-control sign or signal:
   (A)   In the center of the street.
   (B)   Within an intersection.
   (C)   On a crosswalk.
   (D)   Upon any bridge or viaduct or the approach thereto.
   (E)   Within ten feet from the intersection of curb lines, or, if none, then
within ten feet of the intersection of property at an intersection.
   (F)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or
traffic-control signal located at the side of the roadway.
   (G)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station.
   (H)   Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant.
   (I)   In front of any private or public driveway.
   (J)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
   (K)   At any place where official traffic-control signs have been erected
prohibiting standing and parking.
   (L)   On the roadway beside any vehicle stopped or parked at the street edge
or curb. The intention of this division is to prohibit what is commonly known
as “double parking” or “double line parking.”
('68 Code, § 27-100)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 95
§ 72.03 TEN FEET OF ROADWAY TO BE LEFT AVAILABLE FOR TRAFFIC.
   It shall be unlawful for any operator to stop, stand or park any vehicle
upon a street or alley in such manner or under such conditions as to leave
available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway free for movement of
vehicular traffic, except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations,
traffic signs or directions of a police officer.
('68 Code, § 27-101)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.04 DESIGNATION AND MARKING OF AREAS WHERE PARKING IS PROHIBITED OR
LIMITED.
   (A)   The Director of Public Works shall cause spaces in which parking is
prohibited to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets and parts
thereof as may be designated by the City Council from time to time. The
Director of Public Works shall also cause time limit parking areas to be
maintained and marked off in and on such part or parts of streets as may be
designated by the City Council from time to time. All such spaces or areas
shall be clearly indicated by appropriate signs or by markings on the pavement
or curb.
   (B)   In areas designated as time limit parking areas, parking may be
limited to any period prescribed by Council, the same to be designated with
clearly distinguished markings or signs at both ends of the time limit area and
at reasonable intervals between the beginning and ending of such time limit
area, indicating the time allowed for parking in such area.
   (C)   Any prohibition of or time limit on parking established under this
section shall apply on such days and between such hours as prescribed by
Council.
('68 Code, § 27-102)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.05 PARKING IN PROHIBITED AREAS; OVERTIME PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any
vehicle registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession
or under his control to be or remain in any space or area in which parking is
prohibited as provided in §
72.04, or in a time limit parking area for a longer period of time than that
designated by the markings on the street or by clearly visible signs.
('68 Code, § 27-103)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.06 PARALLEL AND ANGLE PARKING.
   (A)   Except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic
signs or signals, and except as otherwise provided in this section, the
operator of a vehicle shall not stand or park such vehicle in a roadway other
than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful
traffic, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the
edge of the curb.
   (B)   The City Council shall determine by resolution upon what streets angle
parking shall be permitted and shall, at the time of such determination,
provide £or the marking or signing of such streets. Such angle parking shall
not be indicated upon any federal-aid or state highway within this city unless
the state highway engineer has determined that the roadway is of sufficient
width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of
traffic. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where
passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side
of the street or upon any railway tracks.
   (C)   Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking,
no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or
edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.
   (D)   Whenever parking spaces are marked by lines on the pavement, whether
for parallel or angle parking, a vehicle must be parked entirely within the
lines of the parking space.
('68 Code, § 27-104)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701d, § 96
§ 72.07 LIMITATION ON PARKING BETWEEN 1:00 A.M. AND 6:00 A.M.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle
for a period of time longer than 30 minutes between the hours of 1.00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. in any business district of the city.
('68 Code, § 27-105)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.08 PARKING FOR DISPLAYING VEHICLE FOR SALE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle upon a street for
the purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale.
('68 Code, § 27-106)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.09 PARKING FOR DISPLAY OF ADVERTISING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any street for
the primary purpose of displaying advertising thereon.
('68 Code, § 27-107)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.10 BUS STOPS.
   (A)   The City Council shall have the right to establish bus stops on such
public streets in such places and in such manner as it shall determine to be of
greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such bus stop so
established shall be designated by appropriate signs.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator or driver of any vehicle other
than a bus to stand or park in an officially designated bus stop, except that
the operator or driver of any passenger vehicle may temporarily stop in a bus
stop for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
passengers.
('68 Code, § 27-109)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.11 IMPOUNDMENT OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Any official of the city, or any peace officer, or any agent of the
city is given authority to tow or cause to be towed to the city impound lot or
other place designated as an impound lot, any vehicle, recreational vehicle, or
trailer which is parked in violation of any of the provisions of this title or
any other ordinance of the city and there kept until its redemption shall be
made by the owner or his duly authorized agent after payment to the city the
sum of $100, together with all other costs of removal and storage that may have
accrued thereon. If any vehicle, recreational vehicle, or trailer is stored on
the city impound lot, the storage fee shall accrue at $20 per calendar day.
   (B)   The remedy and impounding fee and costs provided for in this section
shall be cumulative and shall not relieve any person from prosecution for
violating any provision of this title or any other ordinance of the city.
('68 Code, § 27-110) (Am. Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.12 OWNER PRESUMED VIOLATOR.
   In any prosecution charging a violation of any provision of this title or
any other ordinance or regulation governing the standing or parking of a
vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was
parked in violation of any such provision, ordinance or regulation, together
with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such
parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a
prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the
person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time
during which, such violation occurred.
('68 Code, § 27-111)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.13 RESIDENTIAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ADJACENT TO RESIDENTIAL AREA. Any public property or right-of-way
abutting real property which is contiguous to any residentially zoned property.
      CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT. As defined by §
96.01 of this code.
      RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. As defined by §
96.01 of this code.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. As defined by §
96.01 of this code.
      RESIDENTIAL AREA. Property zoned as single-family dwelling district, two-
family dwelling district, or apartment house district as established by the
zoning regulations of the city in
Ch. 154 of this code.
      TRAILER. As defined by §
96.01 of this code.
   (B)   Restrictions.
      (1)   Except as provided by division (B)(3), it shall be unlawful for any
person to leave, park, or stand any trailer or vehicle, other than a passenger
car or motorcycle, upon any public property or right-of-way, within or adjacent
to a residential area. This section shall not prevent the parking or standing
of a trailer or vehicle within residential areas for the purpose of
expeditiously loading or unloading passengers or property.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, park or stand any
recreational vehicle upon any public property or right-of-way, within or
adjacent to a residential area abutting real property not owned or occupied by
the person.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to cause, permit,
allow, or suffer any recreational vehicle owned by such owner or occupant, or
by an invited guest, to be left, or parked or standing on public property or
right-of-way abutting the real property owned or occupied by such owner or
occupant, for any period of time, on three or more calendar days within any 30
day period.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, park or stand, upon
any public property or right-of-way, any vehicle when the vehicle does not have
lawfully affixed thereto a valid license plate(s) and current valid
registration insignia.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit, or
suffer any motor vehicle or trailer to be or remain parked, upon any street or
public right-of-way, within ten feet of any mailbox between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. on regular mail delivery days.
      (6)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, park or stand any
vehicle, recreational vehicle, bicycle, trailer, or personal property in a
manner prohibited by Tex. Trans. Code Ch. 545, Subch. G.
   (C)   In the event this section conflicts with any existing section of this
code of ordinances, this section shall prevail.
('68 Code, § 27-112) (Ord. 6-1977-24, passed 6-14-77; Am. Ord. 7-1980-23,
passed 7-8-80; Am. Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30,
passed 4-25-23) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.14 ONE-HOUR PARKING ZONES.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for a period of time
longer than one hour in a designated one-hour parking zone.
   (B)   This section shall apply on all days other than Saturday, Sunday and
legal holidays, but only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
('68 Code, § 27-113(a),(c)) (Ord. 7-1978-30, passed 7-11-78)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Cross-reference:
   Parking zones, see
Ch. 75, Schedule I
§ 72.15 HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES.
   (A)   Definition. The term DISABLED as used herein shall have the same
definition as set out in Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6675a-5e.1.
   (B)   Designation. The City Engineer is authorized to designate specific
parking spaces upon public property as handicapped parking spaces. The owner of
private property open to the public for parking purposes may, with the
authorization and approval of the City Engineer, designate specific spaces as
handicapped parking spaces. All such spaces shall be designated by signs
legibly stating that such parking space or spaces are restricted to use only by
the handicapped. A record of such designation, approval, and the location of
such signs, shall be maintained by the City Engineer, or under his authority,
for the purpose of enforcement of the provisions of this section.
   (C)   Authorized parking only. Only disabled persons or persons transporting
a disabled person shall park a vehicle in any parking space or parking area
designated specifically for the physically handicapped in accordance with
division (B) of this section, and it is an offense for any person not so
disabled or not transporting a disabled person to park vehicle in any such
designated parking space.
   (D)   Prima facie evidence. It shall be prima facie evidence of the fact
that a vehicle is not parked or used for the transportation of disabled persons
if the vehicle does not have a specially designated symbol tab or device
stating “disabled” thereupon and issued by the state highway department and
properly displayed on the vehicle.
('68 Code, § 27-114) (Ord. 1-1981-1, passed 1-13-81)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.16 RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT AND CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person to store or park construction equipment or
recreational equipment on or over a roadway, public right-of-way or sidewalk.
It is a defense to prosecution if the construction equipment is operated,
stored or parked at a designated construction site.
   (B)   It is unlawful for a person to store or park a recreational vehicle on
a public right-of-way for sleeping purposes.
   (C)   It is unlawful for a person to store or park a recreational vehicle
for more than 24 hours on any public property or public right-of-way not
located in a residential district.
   (D)   It is unlawful for a person to store or park a recreational vehicle on
or over a sidewalk.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 72.17 ENFORCEMENT.
   All parking provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by a peace officer
or by a qualified employee duly appointed by the City Manager.
('68 Code, § 27-18(c)) (Ord. 3-1978-12, passed 3-14-78; Am. Ord. 7-1991-21,
passed 7-25-91; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23) Penalty, see §
70.99
LOADING ZONES
§ 72.25 LOADING AND UNLOADING — GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any operator of a vehicle to stop or park the same
in a parking space for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise,
supplies. and materials, except where the place of business where such
merchandise, supplies or materials are to be loaded or unloaded does not have
either a usable entrance from an adjoining alley or an officially designated
loading zone on that part of the street adjacent to such place of business.
Where there is neither a usable entrance to a place of business from an alley,
nor an officially designated loading zone on that part of the street adjacent
to such place of business, the operator of a vehicle may, without making
deposit in any parking meter, use not to exceed two parking spaces for loading
or unloading at such places of business, for the length of time necessary to
expeditiously load or unload such vehicle and give or secure a delivery
receipt.
('68 Code, § 27-108)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.26 BASIC REQUIREMENTS FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF LOADING ZONES.
   (A)   Application for the designation of a loading zone must be made in
writing to the Director of Public Works, and shall be subject to the approval
of the Traffic Safety Committee and the City Council.
   (B)   Approval of one loading zone (shall be granted) if:
      (1)   A usable entrance from an adjoining alley or street does not exist.
      (2)   A loading zone does not presently exist within 100 feet, either
direction of the business or person requesting such; in any alley or upon any
city street.
      (3)   A loading zone does not presently exist within 100 feet, either
direction, or a street or alley intersection.
      (4)   There is sufficient distance (i.e., 22 feet minimum) within which
to establish a loading zone, excluding:
         (a)   Ten feet from an alley or street intersection of curblines or
property lines, if curbs do not exist.
         (b)   Twenty feet from the driveway entrance to any fire station.
         (c)   Fifteen feet from any fire hydrant.
   (C)   Approval of two consecutive loading zones shall be granted if:
      (1)   A usable entrance from an adjoining alley or street does not exist.
      (2)   One such vehicle that might occupy the loading zone on a regular
basis (at least once a week), exceeds 22 feet in length.
      (3)   There is sufficient distance (i.e., 44 feet minimum) within which
to establish a loading zone, excluding:
         (a)   Ten feet from an alley or street intersection of curblines or
property lines, if curbs do not exist.
         (b)   Twenty feet from the driveway entrance to any fire station.
         (c)   Fifteen feet from any fire hydrant.
   (D)   Before approval of division (B) or (C) above, the need for a loading
zone must be justified in the minds of the members of the Traffic Safety
Committee considering such request.
('68 Code, § 27-117) (Ord. 7-1976-30, passed 7-13-76; Am. Ord. 12-1983-47,
passed 12-13-83)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Cross-reference:
   Off-street loading requirements of zoning regulations, see §
155.54
§ 72.27 MARKING OF ZONES.
   Whenever any loading zone has been established, the Director of Public Works
shall erect and maintain, or cause to be maintained, appropriate signs or
markings indicating the same.
('68 Code, § 27-120)
§ 72.28 STANDING IN FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during
hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case
shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. Upon
the order of a police officer, any vehicle violating this section shall be
towed away at its owner's expense and shall be impounded until payment of such
towing expense and any cost of storage has been made.
('68 Code, § 27-121(a)) (Am. Ord. 12-1983-47, passed 12-13-83)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.29 STANDING IN PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of
time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any
place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations
applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period
not to exceed three minutes. Upon the order of a police officer, any vehicle
violating this section shall be towed away at its owner's expense and shall be
impounded until payment of such towing expense and any cost of storage has been
made.
('68 Code, § 27-122(a)) (Ord. 12-1983-47, passed 12-13-83; Am. Ord. 7-1991-21,
passed 7-25-91)
FIRE LANES
§ 72.75 FIRE LANES ESTABLISHED; PARKING PROHIBITED.
   The locations below are hereby designated as fire lanes for the use of fire
trucks and firefighting apparatus. Hereafter it shall be unlawful for any
person to park any vehicle, other than a fire truck or other firefighting
apparatus, in the fire lanes designated in this schedule.
 
Street            Description
                  A strip 15 ft. wide extending from the north curb line of
Meredith Street   Meredith Street, between the east curb line of Border Street
                  and the east end of Meredith Street.
                  A strip 15 ft. wide extending from the north curb line of
Meredith Street   Meredith Street between the east curb line of Wilhite and the
                  west curb line of Border Street, in the city.
                  A strip 15 ft. wide extending west along the east curb line
South Mill Street of South Mill Street, between the south curb line of West
                  James Street and the north curb line of West Harrell Street,
                  in the city.
                  A strip 15 ft. wide, extending west along the east curb line
South Mill Street of South Mill Street, between the south curb line of West
                  Harrell Street and the north curb line of West Shaffer
                  Street, in the city.
Street Description
Street                Description
                      A strip 18 ft. wide, extending down the center of the
                      public alley from the east property line of the A.T. &
Public alley          S.F. Railroad Company to the west curb line of North
                      Brazos Avenue, through Block No. 666, between Lots 9 and
                      10 and being south of the alley and Lots 4 and 5 being
                      north of the alley.
                      A strip 15 ft. wide extending south from the north curb
Public alley          line of the public alley, from Main Street to Caddo
                      Street, through Block No. 1, in the city.
                      A strip 15 ft. wide extending south from the north curb
Public alley          line of the public alley from Mill Street to Main Street,
                      through Block No. 8, in the city.
                      A strip 15 ft. wide extending south from the north curb
Public alley          line of the public alley from Main Street to Caddo
                      Street, through Block No. 3, in the city.
                      A strip 15 ft. wide extending south from the north curb
                      line 81 ft. of the public alley beginning at Mill Street
Public alley          and extending east, thence a strip 15 ft. wide, extending
                      south from the north curb line from the public alley to
                      Main Street through Block No. 5, in the city.
                      A strip 15 ft. wide, extending down the center of the
Public alley          public alley from Henderson Street to Chambers Street,
                      through Block No. 2, in the city.
                      A strip 15 ft. wide extending south from the north curb
Public alley          line of the public alley, from Caddo Street to Anglin
                      Street, through Block No. 6, in the city.
                      A strip 15 ft. wide from the east curb line of Shaw
Shaw Street           Street extending west both on West Henderson and West
                      Wardville through Block 533, in the city.
                      A strip 15 ft. wide extending from the south curb line of
West Wardville Street West Wardville Street from Granbury Street to Shaw
                      through Block 533, in the city.
                      A strip 15 ft. wide extending west from the east curb
Wood Street           line of Wood Street between the north curb line of Smith
                      Street to the south curb line of Dabney Street, in the
                      city.
 
('68 Code, § 12-7(a), (b)) (Ord. passed 5-28-54; Am. Ord. 7-1983-22, passed 7-
15-83; Am. Ord. 7-1985-46, passed 7-9-85; Am. Ord. 7-1991-21, passed 7-25-91;
Am. Ord. 10-1996-72, passed 10-8-96; Am. Ord. 11-1996-87, passed 11-26-96; Am.
Ord. 03-2005-19, passed 3-8-05) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter for which no other
penalty is set forth shall be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor punishable
by a fine not to exceed $500. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute
a separate offense.
(Ord. 03-2005-19, passed 3-8-05; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
CHAPTER 73: RAILROADS
Section
   
73.01   Maintenance of crossings
   
73.02   Obstructing crossings
Cross-reference:
   Authority to control speed of train, see Charter §
2.5
   City authority relative to railroads, see Charter §
2.5
   Railroad freight terminals and yards permitted in M-1 District, see §
155.40
   Railroad passenger stations permitted in C-2 Zoning District, see §
155.23
   Railroad roundhouses and shops permitted in M-2 District, see §
155.28
Statutory reference:
   Federal Railroad Safety Act, see 45 USC 421 et seq.
§ 73.01 MAINTENANCE OF CROSSINGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, controlling, using or
having in charge any railway, railway switch or sidetrack to maintain and
operate the same in any street, alley or common of this city, unless such
railway switch or sidetrack is kept continually in a state of good repair, by
being well and properly ballasted in the center of the roadbed to a level of
the iron or steel rails, with rock, gravel or wood, and by grading the same
with suitable material so as to prevent no difficulty or obstacle to the free
and easy use of such street, alley or common by vehicles in traveling upon or
across the same, and without constructing suitable or efficient sewers or
culverts to insure thorough drainage at such places on such streets and alleys
as may be indicated by the City Council. The Council may except from the
operation of this section such particular places or localities in the city as,
in its judgment, will not conflict with the public interest and convenience.
   (B)   The section boss or roadmaster, receiver or owner, or contractor of
any particular portion of the railway, switch or sidetrack, whose duty it is to
keep the same in repair and good condition, shall be entitled to 30 days'
verbal or written notice from the Chief of Police or other authority of the
city to comply with the provisions of this section as to any particular street,
alley or common or any particular part thereof. After such notice duly served,
every day's violation of this section shall be construed as a separate and
distinct offense and the party offending shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined as provided in §
10.99.
('68 Code, § 24-2)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 73.02 OBSTRUCTING CROSSINGS.
   If any conductor or engineer of any railroad train or any other person shall
obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk crossing or thoroughfare of this city by
leaving thereon any railroad car, engine or train of cars for a longer time
than five minutes, or shall stop or cause to be stopped any railway engine, car
or train of cars across any street, alley, road, highway or passway so as to
obstruct or interfere with free passage thereon for a longer time than five
minutes, he or she shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('68 Code, § 24-3(a))
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 74: RESERVED
CHAPTER 75: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.    One-hour parking zones
Cross-reference:
   One-hour parking zones generally, see §
72.14
SCHEDULE I. ONE-HOUR PARKING ZONES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for a period of time longer
than one hour in a designated one-hour parking zone. Designated one-hour
parking zones are established in the following areas in the city:
 
Location         Description          Times            Ord. No.   Date Passed
                 Parking meters on
                 the south side of
                 the courthouse on
                 Chambers Street from
                 Main to Caddo shall
Chambers Street  be designated as     [As posted]      5-1985     5-20-85
                 one-hour parking
                 meters. Vehicles can
                 park in these areas
                 a maximum of one
                 hour in duration.
                 A strip 20" wide
                 extending east from
                 the western most
                 line of the parking
                 lot located at the
                 extreme west end of
                 the city hall
                 beginning at the
                 intersection of the  8:00 a.m. - 6:00
City Hall        line and the north   p.m.*            7-1978-30  7-11-78
                 right-of-way line of
                 Henderson St., the
                 intersection being
                 26" east of the east
                 right-of-way line of
                 Buffalo St., and
                 thence north to the
                 south bank of West
                 Buffalo Creek.
                 Both east and west   7:30 a.m. - 8:30
North Colonial   sides of North       a.m.
Drive            Colonial Drive       and              03-2018-30 3-27-18
                 between Harlin Drive 3:00 p.m. -
                 and Woodard Avenue   4:00 p.m.
                 A strip eight" wide
                 south of and along
                 the north right-of-
                 way line of W.
                 Henderson St. in
                 front of city hall,
                 beginning at a point
                 in the north right-
                 of- way line, the
                 point being 63" east
                 of the intersection
                 of the north right-  8:00 a.m. - 6:00
W. Henderson St. of-way line and the  p.m.*            7-1978-30  7-11-78
                 northward extension
                 of the east right-
                 of-way line of
                 Hillsboro St., and
                 thence west along
                 the north right-of-
                 way line of
                 Henderson St. to its
                 intersection with
                 the east right-of-
                 way line of Buffalo
                 St.
*On all days other than Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays.
 
('68 Code, §§ 27-113, 27-138(c) (part)) Penalty, see §
70.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
90.   AIRPORT
         
91.   ANIMALS
         
92.   CEMETERIES
         
93.   FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
         
94.   REGULATION OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL FOOD STORES, MOBILE FOOD UNITS
AND ROADSIDE FOOD VENDORS
         
95.   GARAGE SALES
         
96.   HEALTH AND SAFETY
         
97.   LIBRARY
         
98.   PARKS AND RECREATION; LAKE PAT CLEBURNE
         
99.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
         
100.   FAIR HOUSING
         
101.   CLEBURNE CONFERENCE CENTER; SENIOR CITIZENS CENTER
         
102.   MUSEUM
         
103.   FUNERAL PROCESSIONS
         
104.   ALARMS
         
105.   MARKET SQUARE
         
106.   DONATION BOXES
CHAPTER 90: AIRPORT
Section
General Provisions
   
90.001   Definitions
   
90.002   When open for use
   
90.003   General restrictions on and conditions for use
   
90.004   Airport minimum standards and requirements adopted
   
90.005   Approval of signs and billboards
   
90.006   Unauthorized entry to loading aprons, taxiways, runways or usable
landing area
   
90.007   Applicability of traffic regulations
   
90.008   Starting aircraft engine without competent operator or pilot
   
90.009   Airworthiness of aircraft
   
90.010   Federal aviation agency rules — compliance; adopted by reference
   
90.011   Local rules — compliance
   
90.012   Restrictions on taxiing aircraft
   
90.013   Taking off or landing on other than runway
   
90.014   Taking off or landing contrary to established traffic pattern
   
90.015   Operation of aircraft while under influence of or using liquor or
drugs
   
90.016   Parking of vehicles
   
90.017   Parking of aircraft after sunset
   
90.018   Leaving disabled aircraft on taxiways, runways and the like overnight
   
90.019   Unattended aircraft
   
90.020   Aircraft engine not be run in hangar
   
90.021   Restrictions on running up or checking aircraft engines
   
90.022   Fire prevention regulations
   
90.023   Aircraft not be left in landing or take-off area for instructional
purposes
   
90.024   Unauthorized use of aircraft, tools, accessories and the like
Use and Privilege Fees
   
90.035   Fees levied and imposed
   
90.036   Determination in connection with government aircraft
   
90.037   When payable; interest on delinquencies
   
90.038   Place of payment
   
90.039   Taking off before payment
   
90.040   Agreements and liens to secure payment
   
90.041   Free use of facilities
Permit for Commercial Activities
   
90.050   Permit required
   
90.051   Application
   
90.052   Issuance or denial
   
90.053   Term
   
90.054   Conditions, restrictions and reservations
Contract or Lease for Use or Occupancy of Facilities
   
90.065   Contract or lease — when required
   
90.066   Execution
   
90.067   Conditions and covenants
   
90.068   Term
   
90.069   Special provisions relative to construction or installation of new
facilities
   
90.070   Lease of nonaviation buildings and areas
   
90.071   Grant of exclusive rights prohibited; exception
   
90.072   Lease of excessive space prohibited
Airport Zoning
   
90.080   Short title
   
90.081   Definitions
   
90.082   Zones
   
90.083   Height limitations
   
90.084   Land use restriction
   
90.085   Nonconforming uses
   
90.086   Permits
   
90.087   Duty of City Manager to enforce
   
90.088   Board of Adjustment
   
90.089   Appeals
   
90.090   Judicial review
   
90.091   Conflicting regulations
   
90.092   Enforcement and remedies
Airport Commission
   
90.105   Created; composition; appointment; terms of members
   
90.106   Members not compensated
   
90.107   Organization; election of officers; quorum; rules of order
   
90.108   Meetings
   
90.109   Duties
   
90.110   No authority to spend or to hire or fire employees
 
   
90.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Special use permits for airports, see §
155.31
Statutory reference:
   Aeronautics generally, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 46c, 46d, and 46f through
46i Municipal Airports Act, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 46d
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR CARRIER. Any aircraft operated for hire in which a pilot is provided,
either for training purposes or passenger or cargo purposes, operated on
scheduled or nonscheduled flights, including any aircraft operated or owned by
an air transport line, air feeder line, air cargo line or charter service and
excluding any resident aircraft or aircraft of an aircraft service operator
engaged only in student activities or sightseeing flights.
   AIRCRAFT SERVICE OPERATOR. Any person engaged in the demonstration of
aircraft and aircraft parts, aircraft repairs, aircraft storage, aircraft
servicing, student flight training, sightseeing by aircraft, aircraft rentals
other than as an air carrier, or any other activity connected with aircraft
maintenance, servicing, storage, rental, sales or instruction for which a fee
or service charge is assessed or received.
   AIRLINE PASSENGER CARRIER. An air carrier, other than an air carrier
operated for charter service or charter parties, operated for the
transportation of passengers only or passengers and air mail and air express.
   AIRPORT. The Cleburne Regional Airport.
   AIRPORT MANAGER. The City Manager, or his designated representative.
   CLEBURNE REGIONAL AIRPORT. The land, buildings, roads, hangars, landing
areas, and all property of the city on and at such airport.
   CONCESSIONAIRE. Any person engaged in the operation of any restaurant,
newsstand, vending machine, shop or business, other than the business of an
aircraft service operator, or the sale of any goods, wares, or merchandise
other than aircraft, aircraft parts, gasoline or oil.
   GASOLINE SERVICE OPERATOR. Any person vending, handling, storing, servicing
or furnishing gasoline or oil, or both, for use in such person's aircraft or
the aircraft of another, with or without a charge or profit, at wholesale or
retail, or as an accommodation for himself or another.
   LANDING AREA, RUNWAYS, TAXIWAYS, AND THE LIKE. The landing area, runways,
taxi-ways, loading aprons, parking aprons, parking areas, and other areas and
buildings referred to in this chapter shall respectively refer to and indicate
the landing area, runways, taxiways, loading aprons, parking aprons, parking
area or other particular type area or building as designated by the Airport
Manager and delineated on the ground by signs or markers or upon the map or
plan of the airport.
   MOTOR CARRIER. Any taxi, bus or other vehicle operated for hire in which a
driver is provided, either for passenger or cargo purposes.
   PRIVATE AIRCRAFT. Any aircraft other than an air carrier.
   RESIDENT AIRCRAFT. Any aircraft than remains in operation at the Cleburne
Regional Airport, using the same as a base for a period of 30 days or longer.
('68 Code, § 3-13) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
§ 90.002 WHEN OPEN FOR USE.
   The airport shall be open for public use at all hours of the day subject to
the restrictions provided in this chapter and to such other restrictions due to
inclement weather, the condition of the landing area, the presentation of
special events and like causes, as may be determined by the Airport Manager.
('68 Code, § 3-14) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
§ 90.003 GENERAL RESTRICTIONS ON AND CONDITIONS FOR USE.
   (A)   (1)   The right to use the airport or to exercise any privilege in
connection therewith, for any purpose, whether such right is granted generally
by the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance or by lease, contract,
permit or license, expressed or implied, shall be subject to the following
conditions:
         (a)   All fees or charges in connection with such use or privilege
shall be paid as they accrue and become payable.
         (b)   All terms and provisions of this chapter shall be fully
and in good faith observed.
         (c)   All orders, rules or regulations made by the Airport Manager
shall be fully and in good faith observed.
      (2)   The right to use the airport or to exercise any privilege in
connection therewith shall automatically terminate upon the breach of any of
the foregoing conditions and any such right or privilege so forfeited shall be
reinstated or renewed only upon such terms and conditions as the City Council
shall deem necessary to assure that such conditions will be satisfied. The use
of the airport or the exercise of any privilege in connection therewith shall
constitute an acceptance of the foregoing conditions and an acknowledgement
that such use or privilege is subject thereto.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, there is reserved to the
city in the public interest any right to use or exercise any privilege at or in
connection with the airport.
   (C)   The right to use or exercise any privilege at or in connection with
the airport is limited by the extent of the facilities available therefor at
the airport, and there is hereby reserved to the city, in the public interest,
the right to deny to any person the use of, or the exercise of, any privilege
at or in connection with the airport whenever facilities therefor are
unavailable either because of the absence of such facilities or because
existing facilities are then being fully utilized by others.
   (D)   There is further reserved to the city, in the public interest, the
exclusive right to judge, determine and pass upon the qualifications and
fitness of any person to use, or exercise any privilege at or in connection
with the airport, and to deny an unqualified or unfit person such use or
privilege whenever, in the judgment or opinion of the City Council, such action
is necessary or desirable for the purpose of promoting the protection and
preservation of the public health, safety, order, property and general welfare
of the city and its inhabitants.
('68 Code, § 3-15) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
§ 90.004 AIRPORT MINIMUM STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS ADOPTED.
   Minimum Standards and Requirements for Fixed Based Operator (FBOs) and
Tenants at the Cleburne Municipal Airport [hereafter “Minimum Standards and
Requirements”], a copy of which is incorporated herein by reference, is adopted
and approved as if copied at length herein, except any portions hereinafter
modified or amended. Where conflict exists between any provision of this code
of ordinances and the Minimum Standards and Requirements for airport activity,
the Minimum Standards and Requirements shall govern and prevail. A copy of
Minimum Standards and Requirements has been and will remain on file in the
office of the City Secretary.
('68 Code, § 3-15.1) (Ord. 7-1987-38, passed 7-14-87; Am. Ord. 1- 1995-1,
passed 12-13-94; Am. Ord. 09-2022-69, passed 9-13-22)
§ 90.005 APPROVAL OF SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS.
   No sign, billboard or advertising device shall be installed, erected,
constructed or maintained within the boundaries of the airport unless and until
the location, size, height, materials and subject mater thereof have been
approved by the Airport Manager, as evidenced by a drawing or specification
thereof filed in the office of the Airport Manager bearing his written
endorsement of approval.
('68 Code, § 3-16) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.006 UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY TO LOADING APRONS, TAXIWAYS, RUNWAYS OR USABLE
LANDING AREA.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or walk or to be
carried upon or to enter the loading aprons, taxiways, runways or usable
landing area at any time as a spectator or for the purpose of sightseeing or
any other purpose not authorized by the airport office.
('68 Code, § 3-17) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.007 APPLICABILITY OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of Title VII, the Traffic Code, and any other applicable
traffic regulation of the city now in effect and as hereafter amended or
supplemented shall be applicable to and is hereby extended so as to apply to
the area included in the airport.
('68 Code, § 3-18) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
§ 90.008 STARTING AIRCRAFT ENGINE WITHOUT COMPETENT OPERATOR OR PILOT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to start or run any aircraft engine at
the airport without a competent operator or pilot at the controls of the
aircraft.
('68 Code, § 3-19) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.009 AIRWORTHINESS OF AIRCRAFT.
   No aircraft shall take off or land at the airport unless its owner holds, as
to such aircraft, an effective, valid certificate of airworthiness from the
proper agency of the Government of the United States and unless the aircraft is
operated according to the terms thereof.
('68 Code, § 3-20) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.010 FEDERAL AVIATION AGENCY RULES — COMPLIANCE; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to navigate any aircraft over, land upon
or take off from, or service, repair or maintain any aircraft on the airport or
conduct any operation on or from the airport otherwise than in conformity with
the rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation Agency of the United States
of America, and such rules and regulations are referred to, adopted and made a
part of this chapter as fully in all respects as if particularly set forth in
this chapter.
('68 Code, § 3-21) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.011 LOCAL RULES — COMPLIANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act prohibited by, or to omit
any act required by, rules, regulations and orders promulgated by the Airport
Manager for the purpose of implementing, supplementing or carrying into effect,
with respect to all phases of air travel and transportation, this code and the
ordinances of the city, the laws, rules and regulations of the state or any
proper agency thereof, the air traffic rules of the Department of Commerce,
Federal Aviation Agency, and such other local air traffic rules and ground
rules relating to safety or the prevention of unsafe practices.
('68 Code, § 3-22) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.012 RESTRICTIONS ON TAXIING AIRCRAFT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person:
   (A)   To taxi any aircraft on a loading apron or parking apron at a speed in
excess of 20 miles per hour, or to taxi any aircraft not equipped with adequate
brakes on a loading apron or parking apron at any speed unless an attendant is
at all times beside at least one wing.
   (B)   To taxi any aircraft on a loading apron so as to enter any area where
passengers are entering or leaving any aircraft.
   (C)   To taxi any aircraft in the vicinity of aircraft landing or taking
off, or to fail to completely stop an aircraft being taxied in the vicinity of
aircraft landing or taking off.
   (D)   To taxi any aircraft upon a runway except as a necessary part of
taking off or landing.
   (E)   To taxi any aircraft at night or after sunset unless the navigation
lights and at least one landing light, if equipped with landing lights, are
turned on and burning.
('68 Code, § 3-23) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.013 TAKING OFF OR LANDING ON OTHER THAN RUNWAY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to takeoff or land any aircraft, except
in case of emergency or accident, on any loading apron, parking apron, taxiway,
or any place other than a runway.
('68 Code, § 3-24) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.014 TAKING OFF OR LANDING CONTRARY TO ESTABLISHED TRAFFIC PATTERN.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to take off or land any aircraft
contrary to the air traffic pattern established for the airport.
('68 Code, § 3-25) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.015 OPERATION OF AIRCRAFT WHILE UNDER INFLUENCE OF OR USING LIQUOR OR
DRUGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to take off, land, or operate any
aircraft from, at or over the airport while under the influence of, or using,
any intoxicating liquor or habit-forming drug.
('68 Code, § 3-26) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.016 PARKING OF VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any automobile or other vehicle
outside of the limits of the designated parking area for the particular kind or
type of automobile or vehicle.
('68 Code, § 3-27) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.017 PARKING OF AIRCRAFT AFTER SUNSET.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any aircraft standing or parked
outside of a designated parking area at night or after sunset unless the
navigation lights and at least one landing light, if equipped with landing
lights, are turned on and burning.
('68 Code, § 3-28) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.018 LEAVING DISABLED AIRCRAFT ON TAXIWAYS, RUNWAYS AND THE LIKE OVERNIGHT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any disabled or wrecked
aircraft on any taxiway, runway or any place other than a designated parking
area overnight unless the airport office has granted specific prior authority
and the aircraft is guarded and danger lights are displayed around it.
('68 Code, § 3-29) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.019 UNATTENDED AIRCRAFT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any aircraft unattended on any
loading apron, taxiway, runway or area other than a designated parking area, or
to fail to securely tie down any unattended aircraft.
('68 Code, § 3-30) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.020 AIRCRAFT ENGINE NOT BE RUN IN HANGAR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to start or run any aircraft engine in
any hangar.
('68 Code, § 3-31) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.021 RESTRICTIONS ON RUNNING UP OR CHECKING AIRCRAFT ENGINES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to run up or check any aircraft engine
at any place without having adequate brakes fully set or without having the
wheels set with blocks equipped with ropes or other suitable means for removing
the blocks.
('68 Code, § 3-32) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.022 FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person:
   (A)   To fuel or drain any aircraft while the engine is running, or while in
a hangar or other enclosed place, and without equipment for grounding static
electricity continuously during such fueling or draining operation.
   (B)   To bring, keep or store cylinders, flasks or open containers for any
inflammable fuel in any hangar except in the fuel tanks or aircraft or such
other containers as may have been approved in advance for use in hangars by the
Airport Manager.
   (C)   To clean, repair, paint or assemble motors, aircraft parts of aircraft
within the storage area of any hangar when inflammable fluids or substances or
open flamed are used in such cleaning, repairing or assembling.
   (D)   To smoke or ignite any match or cigarette lighter in any hangar or
building used for the storage or repair of aircraft or fuel or any other place
where a "No Smoking" sign is displayed.
('68 Code, § 3-33) (Ord. passed 1-12-60; Am. Ord. 03-2015-20, passed 3-24-15
Penalty, see § 90.999
Cross-reference:
   Fire prevention, see
Ch. 93
§ 90.023 AIRCRAFT NOT BE LEFT IN LANDING OR TAKE-OFF AREA FOR INSTRUCTIONAL
PURPOSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any aircraft on the landing or
take-off area for the purpose of instructing students between flights.
('68 Code, § 3-34) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.024 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF AIRCRAFT, TOOLS, ACCESSORIES AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to borrow, use or enter any aircraft, or
to borrow or use aircraft parts, accessories, tools or other equipment owned or
controlled by any other person and stored or otherwise left at the airport
without the consent of the owner or operator thereof.
('68 Code, § 3-35) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
USE AND PRIVILEGE FEES
§ 90.035 FEES LEVIED AND IMPOSED.
   There are levied and imposed upon the owners and operators of all aircraft,
and upon all persons performing services or furnishing goods, wares or
merchandise in connection therewith, such fees and charges as the City Council
shall from time to time prescribe for the use of the landing area and the
privilege of performing such services or furnishing goods, wares and
merchandise, and such fees and charges shall accrue and be due and payable to
and for the use and benefit of the city at the time and in the manner provided
in this subchapter.
   (A)   (1)   The monthly charge for use of facilities at the Regional Airport
shall be as follows:
      Small T-hangars         $280 per month
      Large T-hangars         $330 per month
      Storerooms            $50 per month
      Tie Down            $50 per month or $5 per day
      (2)   A daily rate of $5 per day shall begin on the fourth day of use for
a tie down. The daily fee may be waived in lieu of a fuel purchase.
   (B)   (1)   The yearly charge for lease of unimproved land on property
pertaining to the Regional Airport shall be:
      (2)   Land leases rates are determined by location and amount of land
leased per acre per square foot per year as established by the appraisal from
Airport and Aviation Appraisals, Inc., dated August 21, 2022. The rates for
Sites A through F are as follows:
Acres Per Square Feet
Acres    Per Square Feet
Site A
   1-50.20
   6-10.15
   16-0.10
Site B
   <1 0.22
   1-20.17 2
Site C
   <2 0.18
   2-40.15
   4-60.12
Site D
   0.60.25
Site E
   0.10.25
Site F
   1-20.12
   20-0.09
   40-0.07
 
      (3)   All land leases, excluding agricultural leases, shall require any
improvements placed on the leased land to revert to the city after expiration
of the lease and shall be for a maximum period of 40 years.
('68 Code, § 3-53) (Ord. passed 1-12-60; Am. Ord. 9-2001-70, passed 9-25-01;
Am. Ord. 9-2002-62, passed 9-10-02; Am. Ord. 01-2003-01, passed 1-14-03; Am.
Ord. 12-2007-66, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord. 03- 2015-21, passed 3-24-15; Am.
Ord. 06-2015-47, passed 6-23-15; Am. Ord. 05-2017-34, passed 5-23-17; Am. Ord.
04-2018-33, passed 4-24-18; Am. Ord. 09-2022-68, passed 9-13-22)
§ 90.036 DETERMINATION IN CONNECTION WITH GOVERNMENT AIRCRAFT.
   Fees for the use of the landing area by, and provisions for performing any
services or furnishing any goods, wares or merchandise in connection with, any
military, naval or other aircraft owned and operated by the government of the
United States or the State of Texas, or any agency or department of either of
such governments, shall be determined and provided for by agreement between the
city and the agency or department of such governments, and no person shall
charge any fees in connection therewith or perform any services or furnish any
goods, wares or merchandise to such aircraft unless and until permission
therefor has been granted by ordinance or resolution of the City Council.
('68 Code, § 3-54) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
§ 90.037 WHEN PAYABLE; INTEREST ON DELINQUENCIES.
   (A)   All fees imposed under this subchapter shall be payable in advance,
except that:
      (1)   All fees based upon the gross value or volume of sales or gross
revenue, directly or in the alternative, shall be payable on or before the
tenth day of the month next succeeding the month to which the fees are
applicable.
      (2)   All landing fees for nonscheduled air carriers that are based upon
the gross weight of the aircraft shall be payable on the day the landing
occurs.
   (B)   The amount of fees imposed by this division and not paid on or before
the same become due and payable shall bear interest from the due date until
paid at the rate of 10% per annum.
('68 Code, § 3-55) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
§ 90.038 PLACE OF PAYMENT.
   All fees required by this subchapter shall be paid to the city at the office
of the Airport Manager.
('68 Code, § 3-56) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
§ 90.039 TAKING OFF BEFORE PAYMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who incurs or who is directly or
indirectly responsible for incurring, any landing fee, privilege fee or other
fee or charge of any nature or kind whatsoever levied or imposed by, or payable
to or for the benefit of the city on account of, or as a result of, the use of
the airport by, or the furnishing or sale of any services, goods, wares or
merchandise to, for, or in connection with, any aircraft to take off or cause
the taking off, or to attempt to take off or cause the taking off, from the
airport of any aircraft owned, operated or otherwise in the possession or under
the control or supervision of such person, unless and until all such fees and
charges have been satisfied and paid in full, and the Airport Manager is
authorized and instructed to close and deny to such person the use of the
runways, taxiways, and other parts of the airport capable of being used for
taking off aircraft, unless and until such fees and charges have been so
satisfied and paid.
('68 Code, § 3-57) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.040 AGREEMENTS AND LIENS TO SECURE PAYMENT.
   The right to use the airport or to exercise any privilege in connection
therewith, where the use or privilege is subject to any fee or charge by the
city, is reserved to the city and withheld from every person unless and until
the payment of such fees or charges to accrue and be incurred have been secured
by express agreement with the city, and every person who shall use the airport
or exercise any privilege in connection therewith, without first having
expressly provided by agreement with the city for security for such fees and
charges, shall, by the act of using the airport or exercising any privilege in
connection therewith, grant and give, and consent to, a lien in favor of the
city in the amount of the fees and charges to be incurred by him, then or
thereafter, for such use or privilege, upon all property which he shall at any
time use, or have in his possession or under his control, at the airport, in
the same manner and to the same extent as if such lien were expressly agreed to
and contracted for, and any such lien shall be foreclosed as provided by the
Texas Rules of Civil Procedure.
('68 Code, § 3-58) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
§ 90.041 FREE USE OF FACILITIES.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this subchapter, the owners and
operators of aircraft may use the landing area, ramps and roadways of the
airport in common with others without charge; provided, however, that such use
conforms in all respects to the field rules, air traffic patterns, ground rules
and other rules, orders and ordinances promulgated by the Airport Manager and
by the City Council relating to aircraft, air services and aviation and to the
civil air regulations and air traffic rules of the Federal Aviation Agency or
other proper agency of the government of the United States and the State of
Texas.
('68 Code, § 3-59) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
PERMIT FOR COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES
§ 90.050 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any aircraft service operator, gasoline service
operator, concessionaire or motor carrier to engage, or offer to engage, in any
activity at the airport, and for any person to perform or offer to perform any
services, or to furnish or offer to furnish any goods, wares or merchandise, or
to engage or offer to engage in any commercial activity at the airport prior to
the time a permit for each such activity has been granted by the city or after
any permit for any such activity has expired or terminated for any cause.
('68 Code, § 3-65) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.051 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Permits required by §
90.050 and renewals thereof shall be granted only upon application therefor
made to the Airport Manager.
   (B)   Each application for a permit or renewal thereof shall be accompanied
by the application fee, if any, and the application fee shall be promptly
returned to the applicant if the permit is not granted.
   (C)   Each application shall:
      (1)   Fully identify the applicant;
      (2)   Specify in detail the activities to be carried on by the applicant
under the permit;
      (3)   Specify the amount and kind of space in any hangar, shop, or other
building desired to be used by the applicant;
      (4)   Specify the qualifications, training and previous experience of the
applicant and the agents or employees of the applicant, if such information is
then available, in the particular activity for which a permit is requested;
      (5)   Include a financial statement;
      (6)   Include a complete inventory of the aircraft and all other property
or equipment to be employed by the applicant in the particular activity for
which a permit is requested;
      (7)   Be accompanied by at least three letters from persons familiar with
the applicant, attesting to the applicant's social and moral habits and
previous business experience and stating the circumstances under which the
persons acquired their knowledge of such matters;
      (8)   Include proof that all licenses, certificates or permits required
for, or issued in connection with, the particular activity by any agency or
department of the government of the United States or the State of Texas have
been issued and are in good standing; and
      (9)   Include such additional information as may be requested by the
Airport Manager or the City Council in passing upon the application.
('68 Code, § 3-66) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.052 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   (A)   No permit shall be granted or renewed under this subchapter unless and
until the Airport Manager has approved the granting of the permit, or the City
Council has determined that the failure or refusal of the Airport Manager to
approve the same is unjustified.
   (B)   The determination of the City Council to grant or deny a permit for
any activity under this subchapter shall be final and not subject to review.
Any person whose application for a permit has been denied shall, upon request,
be given a hearing thereon and an opportunity to present additional
information.
('68 Code, § 3-67) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.053 TERM.
   No permit shall be granted under this subchapter for a period in excess of
one year, excluding permits to gasoline service operators, and each such
permit, unless limited to expire sooner, shall expire and cease to be effective
for any purpose on December 31 of the year for which the permit is granted,
unless the permit shall have been renewed.
('68 Code, § 3-68) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.054 CONDITIONS, RESTRICTIONS AND RESERVATIONS.
   Each permit issued under this subchapter shall be subject to the following
specific conditions, restrictions and reservations, whether expressed in the
permit or not:
   (A)   That books and records be kept showing accurately the gross value or
volume of sales or gross revenue from the activity for which the permit was
issued for the purpose of determining the correct privilege fee applicable
thereto.
   (B)   That all books and records of and concerning the activity for which
the permit was issued be made available at any reasonable time upon the request
of the Airport Manager for the purpose of an audit to determine the correctness
of any report made and the amount of any privilege fees applicable to the
activity.
   (C)   That on or before the tenth day of each month, a full and complete
report, on the form prescribed by the Airport Manager and approved by the City
Council, be made to the office of the Airport Manager showing the information
necessary to determine the gross value or volume of sales or gross revenue for
the immediately preceding month and the amount of the privilege fee applicable
thereto.
   (D)   That all privilege fees applicable to the activity for which the
permit is granted be promptly paid.
   (E)   That the landing area, ramps and roadways may be used in common with
others to the extent necessary to carry on the activity covered by the permit,
subject to and in accordance with the field rules, air traffic pattern and
control rules, safety rules, and all other ordinances of the city and the air
traffic rules of the Federal Aviation Agency.
   (F)   That all aircraft used in connection with the activity for which the
permit was issued, together with all other property and equipment, be
registered at the office of the Airport Manager.
   (G)   That the permit shall not be assigned, directly or indirectly, to any
other persons.
   (H)   That no activity be engaged in except the particular activities for
which a permit has been granted.
   (I)   That the person to whom the permit is granted, his agents, employees
and students, shall fully and faithfully observe all ground rules, air traffic
rules, and other rules, regulations or orders relating to safety or the
prevention of unsafe practices which shall be promulgated from time to time by
the Airport Manager.
   (J)   That the person to whom the permit is granted, his agents, employees
and students, shall fully and faithfully observe all ordinances of the city,
all laws of the state, and the rules, regulations and orders of any agency or
department thereof, and all laws of the United States of America, and the
rules, regulations and orders of any agency or department thereof, relating to
air travel and commerce, aircraft and the maintenance and operation of aircraft
and facilities in connection therewith.
   (K)   That public liability and property damage insurance, with such
coverages as the City Council shall from time to time require, by ordinance or
resolution, be carried and maintained in force.
   (L)   That the person to whom the permit is granted shall prevent his agents
or employees, and all persons coming upon the airport at his invitation,
expressed or implied, or to transact any business with him, from going upon or
being at any restricted or unsafe portion of the airport and shall assume all
liability and responsibility for, and shall indemnify and hold harmless the
city from, any damages or claim of any nature or kind whatsoever by any such
agent, employee or person, as well as the claims of any other person arising
from, or attributable directly or indirectly to, going upon or being at any
restricted or unsafe portion of the airport.
   (M) That the person to whom the permit is granted will indemnify and hold
harmless the city from all claims or demands of any kind or character
whatsoever arising out of, or connected in any way with, the demonstration of
aircraft and aircraft accessories or student flying activities conducted by the
person to whom the permit is granted, his agents, employees, or students, or
arising out of the operation of any aircraft owned or operated by him, his
agents, employees or students.
   (N)   That, as between the person to whom the permit is granted and the city
only, the person to whom the permit is granted shall assume all risks of every
kind and character whatsoever incident to the use of the airport or the
exercise of any privilege in connection therewith, including specifically, but
not being limited to, the risk of damage or injury arising from any act done or
omitted to be done by any lessee, user or person, and that the person to whom
the permit is granted shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers,
agents and employees, from any liability or loss to him, his agents or
employees, arising out of the use of the airport or the exercise of any
privilege in connection therewith by him, his agents or employees or by any
other person.
   (O)   That the rights of the person to whom the permit is granted shall be
subordinate to the provisions of any existing or future agreement between the
city and the United States of America, relative to the operation or maintenance
of the airport, the execution of which was or may be required as a condition
precedent to the expenditure of funds of the United States Government for the
development or improvement of the airport.
   (P)   That the rights of the person to whom the permit is granted shall be
subordinate to the provisions of any existing or future agreement between the
city and the United States of America for use of the airport or any part
thereof during time of war or national emergency for military or naval
purposes, and that any provisions of the lease or contract shall be suspended
insofar as the same are inconsistent with the provisions of such agreements
with the United States of America.
   (Q)   That in case of default in any of the conditions, or in case of a
violation of any of the limitations, restrictions and reservations, applicable
to the permit, the city may enforce performance or observance thereof in any of
the modes provided by law, and that the permit may be forfeited at its
discretion if the default continues for a period of ten days after notice of
such default or violation and the intention to forfeit the permit is given by
the Airport Manager by sending the notice by mail or otherwise to the office or
other address of the person to whom the permit is granted, and that, unless the
default or violation is cured or stopped completely, the permit and all rights
thereunder shall cease and come to an end at the expiration of such ten days as
if that were the day originally fixed for the termination thereof.
('68 Code, § 3-69) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
CONTRACT OR LEASE FOR USE OR OCCUPANCY OF FACILITIES
§ 90.065 CONTRACT OR LEASE — WHEN REQUIRED.
   The use or occupancy for any purpose of any hangar, shop, warehouse, office,
building or any portion of the grounds of the airport, except the use of the
landing area, ramps, and roadways in common with others, by any person, shall
be unlawful unless and until application therefor has first been made to the
Airport Manager and a lease or contract for such use or occupancy has been made
and entered into by and between such person and the city.
('68 Code, § 3-75) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.066 EXECUTION.
   The Airport Manager, for and on behalf of the city, shall have authority and
power to lease, for any period not exceeding one month, by oral or written
agreement, space in any public hangar for the storage of aircraft only and fix
the rental or storage charge therefor. All other leases or contracts shall be
in writing, signed by the lessee or user, approved by resolution of the City
Council and executed on its behalf by the Mayor and City Clerk.
('68 Code, § 3-76) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
§ 90.067 CONDITIONS AND COVENANTS.
   Every lease or contract made under this subchapter shall be subject to the
following provisions, conditions and covenants, whether expressed therein or
incorporated therein by reference or not:
   (A)   The lessee or user shall restore all buildings and the premises used
to the same order as that existing at the time of entering upon the same,
ordinary wear and tear excepted, at or before the expiration or termination
from any cause of the lease or contract.
   (B)   The lessee or user shall remove all improvements and personal property
placed thereon by him at or before the expiration or termination from any cause
of the lease or contract, and any improvements or property not so removed shall
thereupon and thereafter be and become the property of the city.
   (C)   The lessee or user shall not make alterations, attach fixtures, or
erect additions, structures or signs, in or upon the premises leased, unless
the plans and specifications therefor have been submitted to the Airport
Manager and the same have been approved in writing by the Airport Manager or by
resolution of the City Council.
   (D)   The lease or contract shall not be assigned, in whole or in part,
without prior approval of the City Council.
   (E)   The lessee or user shall keep the premises in a neat, safe and
sanitary condition at all times, and the city, its officers, agents and
employees shall have the right at reasonable times to enter and inspect the
premises and to make any necessary repairs thereto, or determine that any
obligation or covenant of the lessee or user to maintain the premises in good
repairs has been observed.
   (F)   The city shall have the right, as it sees fit, to further develop or
improve the area of the airport or any building or structure thereon and to
take any action it considers necessary or advisable to protect the aerial
approaches to the airport against obstruction and to increase the usefulness of
the airport and prohibit and prevent structures and property which, in the
opinion of the City Council, constitute a hazard to aircraft.
   (G)   The lessee or user shall carry fire, wind and general insurance, as
well as public liability and property damage insurance, with such coverage as
the City Council shall from time to time require, by ordinance or resolution,
upon the premises, equipment and property under the control of the lessee or
user.
   (H)   The lessee or user shall restore any building or other property
destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty while the same is leased to or
occupied or used by him and under his control.
   (I)   The lessee or user shall prevent his agents or employees, and all
persons coming upon the airport at his invitation, expressed or implied, or to
transact any business with him, from going upon or being at any restricted or
unsafe portion of the airport and shall assume all liability and responsibility
for, and shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from, any damage or claim
of any nature or kind whatsoever by any such agent, employee or person, as well
as the claims of any other person, arising from or attributable directly or
indirectly to going upon or being at any restricted or unsafe portion of the
airport.
   (J)   The lessee or user will indemnify and hold harmless the city from all
claims or demands of any kind or character whatsoever arising out of, or
connected in any way with, the demonstration of aircraft and aircraft
accessories or student flying activities conducted by the lessee or user, his
agents, employees, or students, or arising out of the operation of any aircraft
owned or operated by him, his agent, employees or students.
   (K)   As between the lessee or user and the city only, the lessee or user
shall assume all risks of every kind and character whatsoever incident to the
use of the airport or the exercise of any privilege in connection therewith,
including specifically, but not being limited to, the risk of damage or injury
arising from any act done or omitted to be done by any other lessee, user or
person, and that the lessee or user shall indemnify and hold harmless the city,
its officers, agents and employees, from any liability or loss to the lessee or
user, its agents or employees, arising out of the use of the airport or the
exercise of any privilege in connection therewith by the lessee or user, its
agents or employees, or by any other person.
   (L)   The lessee or user, his agents, employees and students, shall fully
and faithfully observe all ground rules, air traffic rules, and other rules,
regulations or orders relating to safety or the prevention of unsafe practices
which shall be promulgated from time to time by the Airport Manager.
   (M) The lessee, or user, his agents, employees and students, shall fully and
faithfully observe all the provisions of this code and any other ordinance of
the city, all laws of the state and the rules, regulations and orders of any
agency or department thereof, and all laws of the United States of America and
the rules, regulations and orders of any agency or department thereof, relating
to air travel and commerce, aircraft and the maintenance and operation of
aircraft and facilities in connection therewith.
   (N)   All rents or charges shall be paid monthly in advance in cash to the
city.
   (O)   All fees and other charges imposed by this chapter upon the lessee or
user be paid at the time and in the manner therein provided.
   (P)   The lease or contract shall cease and terminate and be ineffective as
to any unexpired portion of the term thereof automatically upon the expiration
or termination of any permit or license granted to the lessee or user or
required of the lessee or user under this chapter, or upon the failure, refusal
or inability of the lessee to obtain or renew, or obtain the renewal of, any
such permit or license.
   (Q)   The rights of the lessee or user shall be subordinate to the
provisions of any existing or future agreement between the city and the United
States relative to the operation or maintenance of the airport, the execution
of which was or may be required as a condition precedent to the expenditure of
funds of the United States Government for the development or improvement of the
airport.
   (R)   The rights of the lessee or user shall be subordinate to the
provisions of any existing or future agreement between the city and the United
States of America for use of the airport or any part thereof during time of war
or national emergency for military or naval purposes, and any provisions of the
lease or contract shall be suspended insofar as the same are inconsistent with
the provisions of such agreements with the United States of America.
   (S)   In case of default in any of the covenants or conditions, the city may
enforce performance of the lease in any modes provided by law, and the lease
may be forfeited at its discretion if such default continues for a period of
ten days after the lessee or user is notified of such default and the intention
to declare the lease forfeited, such notice to be sent by mail or otherwise to
the leased premises; and thereupon (unless the default has been completely
removed or cured) the lease or contract shall cease and come to an end as if
that were the day originally fixed for the expiration of the term thereof, and
the city, its agents or attorney, shall have the right, without further notice
or demand, to reenter and remove all persons and property without being deemed
guilty of any manner of trespass and without prejudice to any remedies for
arrears for rent or breach of covenant, and the city shall have a lien as
security for the unpaid rent upon all property of the lessee or user at the
airport.
('68 Code, § 3-77) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.068 TERM.
   Leases or contracts under this subchapter may be made for any period not
exceeding five years, except that, in the case of housing facilities and hangar
site ground rentals or ground rentals for other airport facilities, the lease
or contract shall be for such period as may be agreed to by the lessee and the
city.
('68 Code, § 3-78) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
§ 90.069 SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATIVE TO CONSTRUCTION OR INSTALLATION OF NEW
FACILITIES.
   (A)   No lease or contract for the use of a site or space at the airport for
the construction, erection or installation by the lessee or user of any hangar,
office space, store, restaurant, service establishment, warehouse, building or
other facility shall be made covering any portion of the grounds of the airport
for so long as existing facilities at the airport are available and suitable
for the intended purposes of the lessee or user.
   (B)   Leases or contracts for the use and occupancy of a site or space for
the construction, erection or installation of any facility not available at the
airport, or to take the place of unsuitable existing facilities at the airport,
shall be made and entered into upon application therefor in the manner and
subject to the terms and conditions provided in this subchapter, with the
following exceptions in the case of a lease or contract for a site or space for
any building, structure or facility other than for tanks or other means of
storing or dispensing fuel:
      (1)   The lease or contract shall be for a term not to exceed 15 years,
as determined by the City Council on the basis of the area or space required,
the location thereof, the type and nature of the building, structure or
facility, the purpose and intended use thereof, the cost thereof and the rate
of depreciation applicable thereto.
      (2)   The original cost of constructing, erecting or installing the
building, structure or facility shall be prorated or amortized over the term of
the lease or contract and as so prorated or amortized shall be in full
satisfaction of all obligations of the lessee or user to pay any rental for and
during the full term of the lease or contract, except the monthly money rentals
that might be provided for in the lease or contract.
      (3)   Upon completion of the building, structure or facility, and upon
expiration or termination of the lease or contract, the building, structure or
facility shall be and become the property of the city.
      (4)   The lessee or user shall keep the building, structure or facility
in good repair and in a safe, sanitary and attractive condition, during the
entire term of the lease, and shall replace the same in the event it shall be
destroyed by fire or other casualty during the term of the lease.
      (5)   The lessee or user may assign or sell the lease or contract to any
person approved by the City Council.
      (6)   The lessee or user, his successors and assigns, shall have an
option exercisable at any time within 30 days before the expiration of the
original term, to renew the lease or contract for an additional term of not to
exceed five years, to commence from the expiration of the original term, at the
yearly or monthly rental then in effect for similar buildings, structures, or
facilities used for like purposes at a comparable location at the airport and
subject to the covenants and conditions then provided in similar leases or
contracts.
      (7)   The lease or contract shall be subject to such other and additional
terms, covenants and conditions as may be agreed to and incorporated in the
lease or contract.
('68 Code, § 3-79) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
§ 90.070 LEASE OF NONAVIATION BUILDINGS AND AREAS.
   (A)   The City Council, upon the recommendation of the Airport Manager,
shall designate the buildings and areas at the airport that are not suitable
for, or are not currently required for, air commerce or other aviation purposes
and that are suitable or adaptable for use as warehouses, stores, service
establishments or any other commercial, industrial, agricultural, or livestock
purposes not connected directly with air commerce or the furnishing of services
or goods, wares or merchandise to air passengers or aircraft owners or
operators. Such nonaviation buildings and areas shall be leased by inviting
competitive bids. The invitation to bid shall designate the particular building
or area, the purpose for which it will be leased, the minimum and maximum term
for which it will be leased, and the time within which bids must be submitted.
The invitation to bid shall be published in any manner which the City Council
may determine. All bids submitted shall be sealed and delivered to the City
Clerk. At the time announced in the invitations, the bids shall be opened in
the presence of a majority of the City Council, and no award shall be made
except to one of such bidders. The City Council shall determine the most
advantageous bid for the city and shall award the lease to such bidders, but
the City Council shall have the right to reject any and all bids, and, in the
event all bids are rejected, may call for new bids. Pending the time for
submitting bids, the terms and conditions of the lease that is to be made and
entered into with the successful bidder shall be on file in the office of the
City Clerk and the Airport Manager for inspection of all persons desiring to
bid. The building or area shall also be made available for inspection by all
persons desiring to bid.
   (B)   The rental for such nonaviation buildings and areas shall be based
upon the number of square feet of area, a fixed annual or monthly rental, a
percentage or share of the gross value or volume of sales, or any combination
thereof, as the City Council shall determine and cause to be stated in the
invitation for bids.
   (C)   Each lease under this section shall be in writing, executed by the
lessee, approved by resolution of the City Council, and executed on behalf of
the city by the Mayor and City Clerk.
('68 Code, § 3-80) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
§ 90.071 GRANT OF EXCLUSIVE RIGHTS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   There shall never be granted to any person the exclusive right for the use
of any landing area or air navigation facility or the exercise at the airport
of any privilege to carry on any business, trade or profession for or in
connection with the sale of furnishing of services, goods, wares or merchandise
to or for aircraft, or the operation or navigation thereof, other than the
furnishing of aircraft gasoline and other petroleum products used in airplanes,
which may be granted as an exclusive right.
('68 Code, § 3-81) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.072 LEASE OF EXCESSIVE SPACE PROHIBITED.
   There shall never be leased at the airport any space or facility in excess
of that reasonably necessary for the conduct and operation of the business,
trade or profession of the lessee.
('68 Code, § 3-82) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
Penalty, see § 90.999
AIRPORT ZONING
§ 90.080 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as “Cleburne Regional
Airport Hazard Zoning Regulations.”
('68 Code, § 3-94) (Ord. 3-1981-5, passed 2-23-81; Am. Ord. 06-2023-39, passed
6-13-23)
Cross-reference:
   Buildings, see
Ch. 150
   Planning and Zoning Commission, see §§
153.01 et seq.
   Zoning, see
Ch. 155
§ 90.081 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRPORT. Cleburne Regional Airport.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION. The established elevation of the highest point on the
runway, either existing or planned, at the airport measured in feet above mean
sea level (MSL). The airport elevation of the Cleburne Regional Airport is
854.2 feet above mean sea level (MSL).
   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure, tree, or use of land which obstructs the
airspace required for the flight of aircraft or obstructs or interferes with
the control, tracking, and/or data acquisition in the landing, takeoff, or
flight at an airport or any installation or facility relating to flight,
tracking, and/or data acquisition of the flight craft; is hazardous to,
interferes with, or obstructs such landing, takeoff, or flight of aircraft; or
is hazardous to or interferes with tracking and/or data acquisition pertaining
to flight and flight vehicles.
   APPROACH SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway
center line, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface
and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in
§
90.083 of this subchapter. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface
coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.
   APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL, AND CONICAL ZONES. These zones are set
forth in §
90.082 of this subchapter.
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. A board appointed under § 90.088 of this chapter and as
provided in Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 241.032.
   CITY MANAGER. The officer or person, or his or her designee, designated in §
90.087 to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein.
   CONICAL SURFACE. A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery
of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 feet horizontally for each one foot
vertically for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
   EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION (ETJ). The unincorporated area, not a part of
any other municipality, that is contiguous to the corporate limits of the city,
the outer limits of which are measured from the extremities of the corporate
limits of the city outward up to the distance stipulated in Chapter 42 of the
TEX. LOC. GOV’T CODE, as may be amended, according to the population of the
city, and in which area the city may apply ordinances and regulations
specifically provided by Chapters 42 and 241 of the TEX. LOC. GOV’T CODE, or
other provisions of state law to be applied by the City of Cleburne, Johnson
County, or the Cleburne-Johnson County Joint Airport Zoning Board within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction.
   HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION. An obstruction determined to have a substantial
adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
   HEIGHT. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this subchapter and shown on the zoning map described in §
90.082, the datum shall be height above mean sea level elevation as measured in
feet, unless otherwise specified.
   HORIZONTAL SURFACE. A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established
airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter
of the horizontal zone.
   NONCONFORMING USE, STRUCTURE, OR TREE. Any preexisting structure, object of
natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of
this subchapter or an amendment thereto, which is existing as of the effective
date of this subchapter, as amended.
   NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing instrument
approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal
guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in
nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. Within
this subchapter, this term refers to Runway 15-33 as indicated on the adopted
airport hazard zoning map described in §
90.082.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile
object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in §
90.083 of this subchapter.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association or government entity; includes a trustee, a receiver,
an assignee, an administrator, an executor, a guardian, or a similar
representative.
   PRIMARY SURFACE. A 500-foot-wide surface longitudinally centered on the
runway extending the full length of the ultimate runway configuration plus 200
feet beyond each ultimate end of the runway. The width of the primary surface
is set forth in §
90.082 below. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as
the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
   RUNWAY. Runway 15-33, or other runway as indicated on the adopted airport
hazard zoning map described in §
90.082 below. Runway 15-33 is a defined area of the Cleburne Regional Airport
prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. The zoned length
of Runway 15-33 at the Cleburne Regional Airport is 5,697 feet. The planned
ultimate length of Runway 15-33 at the Cleburne Regional Airport is 6,280 feet.
   STRUCTURE. An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by
man, including, but not limited to, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks,
poles, earth formation, overhead transmission lines, and transverse ways.
Transverse ways are considered to be the heights set forth in 14 C.F.R. Part
77.23.
   TRANSITIONAL SURFACES. These surfaces extend outward at 90° angles to the
runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet
horizontally for each one foot vertically from the sides of the primary and
approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces.
Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces,
which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a
distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from either edge of the approach
surface and at 90° angles to the extended runway centerline.
   TREE. Any type of flora that is an object of natural growth.
('68 Code, § 3-95) (Ord. 3-1981-5, passed 2-23-81; Am. Ord. 06-2023-39, passed
6-13-23)
§ 90.082 ZONES.
   In order to carry out the provisions of this subchapter, there are created
and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the
approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical surfaces as they apply to
Cleburne Regional Airport. Such zones are shown on Cleburne Regional Airport
Zoning Map prepared by Coffman Associates, and adopted by City Council on
December 13, 2022, which is attached to this subchapter and made a part hereof
by reference. A copy of the map shall be made available upon request at the
Cleburne Regional Airport administrative office. An area located in more than
one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more
restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and
defined as follows:
   (A)   Approach zones. Approach zones are hereby established beneath the
approach surfaces at each end of Runway 15-33 at the airport. The approach
surface shall have an inner edge width of 500 feet, which coincides with the
width of the primary surface, at a distance of 200 feet beyond each runway end,
widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance
of 10,000 feet beyond the end of the primary surface. The centerline of the
approach surface is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
   (B)   Transitional zones. The transitional zones are the areas beneath the
transitional surfaces. Transitional surface, symmetrically located on either
side of the runway, have variable widths as shown on the Cleburne Regional
Airport Hazard Zoning Map. Transitional surfaces extend outward perpendicular
to the runway centerline and the extended runway centerline from the periphery
of the primary surface and the approach surfaces to where they intersect the
horizontal surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach surface
projects through and beyond the conical surface, there are hereby established
transitional zones beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the
approach surface and extending for a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet as
measured perpendicular to the extended runway centerline.
   (C)   Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is established beneath the
horizontal surface at the airport which is a plane 150 feet above the
established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by
swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary
surface of the runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent
to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and
transitional zones.
   (D)   Conical zone. The conical zone is established as the area beneath the
conical surface at the airport that commences at the periphery of the
horizontal zone and extends outward there from a horizontal distance of 4,000
feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7945.png]
 
   Figure 1: Cleburne Regional Airport Hazard Zoning Map
('68 Code, § 3-96) (Ord. 3-1981-5, passed 2-23-81; Am. Ord. 06-2023-39, passed
6-13-23)
§ 90.083 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, no structure shall be
erected, altered, or replaced, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone
created by this subchapter, to a height in excess of the applicable height
herein established for such zone, except as provided in this § 90.083. Such
applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in
question as follows:
   (A)   Approach zones. Slope one foot in height for each 34 feet in
horizontal distance beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and extending to a point 10,000 feet beyond the end of the
primary surface.
   (B)   Conical zone. Slopes one foot in height for each 20 feet in horizontal
distance beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet
above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the
airport elevation, or to a height of 1,204 feet above mean sea level.
   (C)   Horizontal zone. Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation,
or at a height of 1,004.2 feet above mean sea level.
   (D)   Transitional zones. Slope one foot in height for each seven feet in
horizontal distance beginning at the sides of and at the same elevations as the
primary surface and the approach surfaces.
   (E)   Excepted height limitation. Nothing contained in these regulations
shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction, or maintenance of
any structure or tree to a height of up to 50 feet above the surface of the
land at its location.
('68 Code, § 3-97) (Ord. 3-1981-5, passed 2-23-81; Am. Ord. 06-2023-39, passed
6-13-23)
§ 90.084 LAND USE RESTRICTION.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subchapter, no use may be made
of land or water within any zone established by this subchapter in such a
manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to
distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of
pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport,
create potential bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or
interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to
use the airport.
('68 Code, § 3-98) (Ord. 3-1981-5, passed 2-23-81; Am. Ord. 06-2023-39, passed
6-13-23)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.085 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Nonconforming uses. Nothing contained in these regulations shall be
construed as requiring changes in or interference with the continuance of any
nonconforming use of land.
   (B)   Nonconforming structures. Nothing contained in these regulations shall
be construed as to require the removal, lowering, or other change to any
existing nonconforming structure including all phases or elements of a
multiphase structure the construction of which was begun prior to the effective
date of these regulations and is diligently prosecuted.
   (C)   Nonconforming trees. Nothing in these regulations shall be construed
as to require the removal, lowering, or other change to any nonconforming tree.
However, any nonconforming tree which grows to a greater height than it was as
of the effective date of these regulations is subject to the provisions of
these regulations as described in §
90.083 above.
   (D)   Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (C) of
this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is
required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such
markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the City Manager to indicate
to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of
such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated,
and maintained at the expense of the city.
('68 Code, § 3-99) (Ord. 3-1981-5, passed 2-23-81; Am. Ord. 06-2023-39, passed
6-13-23)
Penalty, see § 90.999
§ 90.086 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permits.
      (1)   Any person who desires to replace, rebuild, substantially change,
or repair a nonconforming structure or replace or replant a nonconforming tree
must apply for and receive a permit, and the permit shall be granted upon
affirmative demonstration by the applicant that the proposed construction,
repair, or tree conforms to the requirements of this subchapter. However, no
permit shall be granted which would allow the establishment of an airport
hazard or allow a nonconforming structure or tree to exceed its original height
or become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was at the time of the
adoption of these regulations, except as provided for in §
90.086(D) below. Applications for permit shall be applied to and issued by the
City Manager or designee.
         (a)   In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and
conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than
75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain,
land contour, or topographic features, such tree or structure would extend
above the height limits prescribed for such zones.
         (b)   In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones but at a
horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the runway, no
permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of
vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would
extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones.
         (c)   In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones
beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zones, no permit shall be required for
any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground,
except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or
topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for such
transition zones.
      (2)   Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions set forth in
divisions (a) through (c) above shall be construed as permitting or intending
to permit any construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth of any
tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this subchapter
except as set forth in §
90.083(E) above.
   (B)   Existing structures. No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming structure
or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on the
effective date of this subchapter or any amendments thereto or than it is when
the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for
such a permit shall be granted.
   (C)   Nonconforming structure abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the City
Manager determines that a nonconforming tree has physically deteriorated, or
decayed, or a structure has been abandoned or more than 50% torn down or
damaged, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to
be rebuilt in such a way that it exceeds the applicable height limit or
otherwise deviates from the regulations of this subchapter.
   (D)   Variances.
      (1)   Any person desiring to erect, substantially change, or increase the
height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree so as to exceed the
height limitations set forth in this subchapter, or change the use of property
in such a way as to create a hazardous condition as described in §
90.084 above, may apply to the Board of Adjustment for a variance from such
regulations. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a
determination from the Federal Aviation Administration under 14 C.F.R. Part 77
as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities
and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace.
      (2)   Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a
literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in
unnecessary hardship, and that relief granted will not be contrary to the
public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do
substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of this
subchapter.
      (3)   Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of
this subchapter may be considered by the Board of Adjustment unless a copy of
the application has been furnished to the City Manager or designee for advice
as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the City Manager or designee
does not respond to the application within 15 days after receipt, the Board of
Adjustment may act on its own to grant or deny said application.
   (E)   Requirements and reasonable conditions. Any variance granted may, at
the discretion of the Board of Adjustment, impose any reasonable conditions as
may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of these regulations.
   (F)   Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may,
if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this subchapter
and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the
owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and maintain,
at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed
proper by the Board of Adjustment, this condition may be modified to require
the owner to permit the city, at its own expense, to install, operate and
maintain the necessary markings and lights.
('68 Code, § 3-100) (Ord. 3-1981-5, passed 2-23-81; Am. Ord. 06-2023-39, passed
6-13-23)
Penalty, see § 90.999
Cross-reference:
   Special use permits for airports, see §
155.31
§ 90.087 DUTY OF CITY MANAGER TO ENFORCE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the City Manager, or the City Manager’s
designee, to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein.
Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the City Manager or
designee upon a form published for that purpose. Applications required by this
subchapter to be submitted to the City Manager shall be promptly considered and
granted or denied. Application for action by the Board of Adjustment shall be
forthwith transmitted by the City Manager or designee.
   (B)   This subchapter shall remain in full force and effect within the
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) of the City of Cleburne, as the ETJ may be
enlarged, reduced, or amended by direct or indirect action of the City Council.
Within the city limits of the City of Cleburne, § 155.4.06.F shall have effect
and this subchapter shall not have effect.
('68 Code, § 3-101) (Ord. 3-1981-5, passed 2-23-81; Am. Ord. 06-2023-39, passed
6-13-23)
§ 90.088 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Powers. The existing Board of Adjustment is appointed as the Board of
Adjustment for the City of Cleburne Regional Airport in accordance with Tex.
Loc. Gov't Code § 241.032 in order to have and exercise the following powers:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by the City Manager in the enforcement of this
subchapter;
      (2)   To hear and decide specific variances.
   (B)   Composition; terms; vacancies. The Board of Adjustment shall consist
of five members; each to be appointed for a term of two years and removable for
cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public
hearing. Vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose
term becomes vacant.
   (C)   Organization. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for its
governance and in harmony with the provisions of this subchapter. Meetings of
the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at
such other times as the Board of Adjustment may determine. The Chairperson or,
in the absence of the Chairperson, the acting Chairperson may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the Board of Adjustment
shall be public. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon each question; or if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office
of the City Secretary and on due cause shown.
   (D)   Written conclusions. The Board of Adjustment shall make written
findings of facts and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted
and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming, or modifying
any order, requirement, decision, or determination which comes before it under
the provisions of this subchapter.
   (E)   Vote required for decisions. The concurring vote of four members of
the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision, or determination of the City Manager or designee, or decide in favor
of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
subchapter, or to effect variation to this subchapter.
('68 Code, § 3-107) (Ord. 3-1981-5, passed 2-23-81; Am. Ord. 06-2023-39, passed
6-13-23)
§ 90.089 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved, any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the
City Manager, made in the administration of this subchapter, may appeal to the
Board of Adjustment if that person or taxpayer is of the opinion that a
decision of the City Manager or designee is an improper application of these
regulations. This same right of appeal is extended to the governing bodies of
the City of Cleburne and Johnson County, Texas, and to the Cleburne-Johnson
County Joint Airport Zoning Board.
   (B)   All appeals hereunder must be taken within ten days of the decision,
by filing with the City Manager or designee a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The City Manager or designee shall forthwith transmit to the
Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken.
   (C)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the City Manager or designee certifies to the Board of
Adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason
of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the opinion of the City
Manager or designee, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings may be stayed only by an order of the Board of Adjustment, after
notice to the City Manager or designee and only if due cause is shown.
   (D)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing
appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and
decide the same within 30 days of receiving the appeal. Upon the hearing, any
party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
   (E)   The Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this
subchapter, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order
requirement, decision, or determination as the Board shall determine to be
appropriate under the circumstances. For this purpose, the Board of Adjustment
has the same powers as the City Manager or designee.
('68 Code, § 3-108) (Ord. 3-1981-5, passed 2-23-81; Am. Ord. 06-2023-39, passed
6-13-23)
§ 90.090 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by a decision of the Board of
Adjustment, may appeal to a court of record as provided in Tex. Loc. Gov't Code
§ 241.041. This same right of appeal is extended to the governing bodies of the
City of Cleburne, Texas, and Johnson County, Texas, and to the Cleburne-Johnson
County Joint Airport Zoning Board.
('68 Code, § 3-109) (Ord. 3-1981-5, passed 2-23-81; Am. Ord. 06-2023-39, passed
6-13-23)
§ 90.091 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this subchapter and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or
trees, and the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation
or requirement shall govern and prevail.
('68 Code, § 3-111) (Ord. 3-1981-5, passed 2-23-81; Am. Ord. 06-2023-39, passed
6-13-23)
§ 90.092 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES.
   The governing bodies of the City of Cleburne, Texas, or Johnson County,
Texas, or the Cleburne-Johnson County Joint Airport Zoning Board may institute
in a court of competent jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct,
or abate any violation of these regulations or of any order or ruling made in
connection with their administration or enforcement including, but not limited
to, an action for injunctive relief.
(Ord. 06-2023-39, passed 6-13-23)
AIRPORT COMMISSION
§ 90.105 CREATED; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT; TERMS OF MEMBERS.
   There is hereby created and established an airport commission in and for the
city. It shall be comprised of five members who shall be appointed by the City
Council, and they shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council; provided,
however, that the term of office shall in no event, without reappointment,
exist for a longer period than two years.
('68 Code, § 3-42)
§ 90.106 MEMBERS NOT COMPENSATED.
   Members of the airport commission shall serve without compensation.
('68 Code, § 3-43)
§ 90.107 ORGANIZATION; ELECTION OF OFFICERS; QUORUM; RULES OF ORDER.
   Immediately after their appointment and confirmation by the City Council,
the members of the airport commission shall meet and organize by electing a
president, a vice-president, and a secretary. The commission shall, upon
organization, proceed to establish such rules and regulations for its
government, as in its judgment may be deemed necessary and proper, and the
Mayor shall appoint such committees as may be provided for by the acts of the
commission. Three members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business, and the general rules of parliamentary law shall be enforced in all
proceedings of the commission.
('68 Code, § 3-44)
§ 90.108 MEETINGS.
   The airport commission shall hold such regular meetings as may be determined
by such commission and as many other special or called meetings as may be
deemed proper and regular under the rules established by such commission. The
Mayor may, at any time, call the commission together for action on any matter
which he or she might deem urgent and important.
('68 Code, § 3-45)
§ 90.109 DUTIES.
   The airport commission shall make plans and recommendations to the City
Council and advise the Council on all matters relating to the airport.
('68 Code, § 3-46)
§ 90.110 NO AUTHORITY TO SPEND OR TO HIRE OR FIRE EMPLOYEES.
   The airport commission shall not contract for the expenditures of any money,
unless the same is authorized by the city, and shall not have the authority to
employ or discharge any employee.
('68 Code, § 3-47)
§ 90.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter for which
not other penalty is set forth, or whoever makes or files any false report
required by this chapter, or whoever shall make any false statement in any
application required by this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as prescribed in §
10.99 of this code.
      (2)   The penalties provided in this section shall be cumulative of, and
in addition to, any other penalties provided by any other law or ordinance and
any other remedies provided at law and equity. The right is also conferred
upon, extended and affirmed to any person who is aggrieved, damaged, or hurt by
virtue of any violation of, or failure to comply with, the provisions of this
chapter to bring suit in any court of competent jurisdiction and obtain such
remedies as may be available at law and equity.
('68 Code, § 3-36) (Ord. passed 1-12-60)
   (B)   Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates
any of the provisions of §
90.035 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
fined not to exceed $500 for each offense. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   (1)   Each violation any provision of §§
90.080 et seq. or of any regulation order, or ruling promulgated under said
subchapter shall constitute misdemeanor and be punishable as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
      (2)   In addition, the city may institute in a court of competent
jurisdiction, an action to prevent restrain, correct or abate any violation of
any regulation, order or ruling made in connection with their administration or
enforcement pursuant to Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 241.044.
('68 Code, § 3-110) (Ord. 3-1981-5, passed 2-23-81; Am. Ord. 12-2007-66, passed
12-11-07)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.001   Definitions
   
91.002   Animals running at large
   
91.003   Nuisance animals
   
91.004   Confinement of unspayed female dogs during estrus
   
91.005   Animals injured on public property
   
91.006   Dangerous animals
   
91.007   Guard dogs
   
91.008   Beekeeping, location restricted
   
91.009   Fowl running at large
   
91.010   Keeping of hogs
   
91.011   Maintenance of pens, stables and the like
   
91.012   Requirements on keeping livestock and fowl
   
91.013   Sale or keeping of certain prohibited animals
   
91.014   Inhumane treatment
   
91.015   Display or sale of dyed or immature animals
   
91.016   Fighting animals
   
91.017   Displaying for commercial purposes
   
91.018   Leaving animal unattended in vehicle
   
91.019   Irresponsible pet owner
   
91.020   Animal establishment - permit required
   
91.021   Powers and duties of citizens
   
91.022   Feeding of animals prohibited, exceptions, and penalties
   
91.023   Unlawful tethering
Rabies Control; Animal Bites
   
91.025   Rabies control
   
91.026   Reporting bites from animals susceptible to rabies
   
91.027   Procedures for other animal bites
Impoundment; Animal Shelter
   
91.035   Animal Shelter Advisory Board
   
91.036   Confinement of dogs and cats; removal
   
91.037   Disposition of impounded animals
   
91.038   Disposition of impounded animals being held on complaint
   
91.039   Disposition of diseased animals
   
91.040   Removal of impounded animals from animal shelter
   
91.041   Adoptions
Administration and Enforcement
   
91.065   Exigent circumstances
   
91.066   Authority to impound animals
   
91.067   Authority to kill, impound or destroy animals
   
91.068   Interference with enforcing officers
   
91.069   Tampering with traps or equipment of Animal Services Officers
   
91.070   Fee schedules
   
91.071   Records
 
   
91.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Animals and keeping of animals near Lake Pat Cleburne, see §
98.060 
   Disposal of animal manure, dead animals, see §
50.04
   Health and sanitation, see
Ch. 96
   Persons riding animals and animal-drawn vehicles, see §
70.08
Statutory reference:
   Rabies Control Act, see Tex. Health and Safety Code §§ 826.001 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL.  Unless otherwise stated, includes any living creature including,
but not limited to, dogs, cats, cows, horses, birds, fish, mammals, reptiles,
insects, fowl and livestock, but specifically excluding human beings.
   ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment offering small animals such as dogs,
cats, birds, fish, ferrets, and other similar animals which are not dangerous
wild animals or livestock, for sale, and that is located within the corporate
limits of the city. This term does not include veterinary or medical
facilities, research or other facilities licensed by government agencies,
wildlife educational center, adoption agencies, or zoological park.
   ANIMAL SERVICES DIVISION. The animal control authority for the city, Texas,
responsible for receiving all reports of animal bites and suspected rabid
animals, investigating all reports of animal bites and suspected rabid animals,
ordering quarantine, and other duties to enforce this chapter.
   ANIMAL SERVICES OFFICER. Any city employee or its designee as determined by
the City Manager of Cleburne, which is authorized to represent and act under
the authority of the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   AT LARGE.
      (1)   On premises of owner. Any animal not confined to the premises of
the owner by a containment device or some physical means of sufficient height,
strength, length, and/or manner of construction to preclude the animal from
leaving the premises of the owner.
      (2)   Off premises of owner. Any animal which is not physically and
continually restrained by some person, by means of a leash or chain of proper
strength and length to preclude the animal from making unsolicited contact with
any person, their clothing, their property, and/or their premises.
      (3)   Provided however, that the following animals shall not be at large:
         (a)   An animal confined within a cage, automobile, truck, or other
vehicle of its owner;
         (b)   An animal in any city-designated dog park so long as it is in
compliance with all posted rules and other requirements of this chapter;
         (c)   An animal used by a peace officer for law enforcement purposes;
         (d)   A search and rescue dog participating in authorized search and
rescue activities or search and rescue training; or
         (e)   An animal participating in an organized event as permitted by
the city.
   CAT.  A domestic feline of either sex, regardless of age, including one
neutered or sterilized, alive or dead.
   COMMERCIAL PURPOSE. Shall include, but not be limited to, intent to sell,
trade, barter, lease, rent or give away any live animal.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL.
      (1)   An animal that commits an unprovoked attack on a human being that
causes bodily injury, serious bodily injury, or death and occurs in a place
other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was
reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own;
and/or
      (2)   An animal that commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an
enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was reasonably certain to
prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a
person to reasonably believe that the animal will attack and cause bodily
injury to that person.
      (3)   An animal that makes an unprovoked attack on a domestic animal,
which occurs when the attacking animal is at-large.
   DOG.  A domestic canine of either sex, regardless of age, including one
neutered or sterilized, alive or dead.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Includes the following species: dog and cat. This term does
not include hybrid animals resulting from crossing wild with domestic species.
   EXIGENT CIRCUMSTANCES. An existing event or circumstance where there is
necessity to act immediately to protect or preserve life or to prevent serious
injury to a person or an animal where the animal owner cannot be located.
   FOWL SHELTER. A farm building or structure specifically designed and
constructed to constrain fowl within its confines that provides adequate space
for movement and exercise; adequate ventilation, and shelter from sun, wind,
cold, and moisture; provides sufficient shade to protect the animal from the
direct rays of the sun at all times; and which is cleaned and sanitized. FOWL
SHELTER may include, but is not limited to: a pen, coop or hutch.
   HARBORING.  The act of keeping and caring for an animal or providing a
premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care for a period of
three days.
   LIVESTOCK. Include but is not limited to horses, cattle, sheep or goats,
large fowl such as emus, grazing animals such as llamas or alpacas.
   MICROCHIP. An identification chip typically implanted under the skin between
the shoulders of an animal for the purpose of identifying its owner.
   MOLEST. The act of harassing, annoying, pestering, chasing, or interfering.
   NUISANCE ANIMAL. Nuisance animal shall mean any animal which negatively
impacts the health, safety, property, or environment of another animal or
person, including, but not limited to, any animal which:
      (1)   Molests passersby or passing vehicles;
      (2)   Attacks other domestic animals;
      (3)   Trespasses on school grounds;
      (4)   Is at large three or more times in a one year period;
      (5)   Climbs upon a motor vehicle not belonging to the animal's owner;
      (6)   Damages public property or private property not belonging to the
animal's owner;
      (7)   Barks, whines, or howls in an excessive, continuous, or untimely
fashion without provocation and thereby disturbs the peace or the calm and
repose of any person of ordinary sensibilities who occupies surrounding
properties;
      (8)   Tears, punctures, or otherwise opens refuse containers, causing
their contents to be emptied or exposed to the elements;
      (9)   Causes fouling of the air by odor, thereby creating an unreasonable
annoyance or discomfort to a person of ordinary sensibilities in close
proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored;
      (10)   Defecates on any property except that belonging to the animal's
owner; or
      (11)   Interferes with refuse collection or other service personnel.
   OCCUPIED BUILDING. A building occupied by a person.
   OWNER.  Any person who has right of property in an animal or who harbors any
animal or allows an animal to remain about their premises for a period of three
days.
   PET ANIMAL.  Includes dogs, cats, rabbits, rodents, birds, reptiles and any
other species of animal which is sold or retained as a household pet, but shall
not include any species of wild, exotic, or carnivorous animal that may be
further restricted in this chapter.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The City of Cleburne Police Department and police
officers who shall have the same powers and authority as vested in the Animal
Services Division and animal services officers.
   RABIES VACCINATION. The vaccination of a dog, cat or other domestic animal
with an anti-rabies vaccine approved by the United States Department of
Agriculture and administered by a veterinarian licensed by the state.
   SECURE ENCLOSURE. An enclosure suitable to prevent entry of other animals or
young children, and suitable to confine a female in heat. Such enclosure shall
be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top, and bottom
and shall be designed to prevent animal(s) from escaping or gaining access to
the enclosure.
   SHELTER. A species-appropriate structure with three solid walls, a solid
floor, and a roof, that is capable of withstanding the elements, protects the
animal from excessive heat and cold and other adverse weather conditions, is
adequately ventilated, and is of sufficient size for the animal to stand, turn
around, sit up, and lie down in a natural manner.
   SPAY OR NEUTER. The surgical removal of the reproductive organs of a dog or
cat or the use of nonsurgical methods and technologies approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration or the United States Department of
Agriculture to permanently render a dog or cat unable to reproduce.
   STRAY ANIMAL. Any animal for which there is not an identifiable owner.
   TRACEABLE IDENTIFICATION. Any animal having a rabies tag, microchip, or
other tag that allows for an identifiable owner.
   UNPROVOKED ATTACK. Relating to an attack by an animal, shall mean that the
animal was not hit, kicked or struck by a person with any object or part of a
person’s body, nor was any part of the animal’s body pulled, pinched or
squeezed by a person.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any mammal native to North America, including feral species,
except the domestic species dog, cat, horse, cow, pig, sheep and goat.
('68 Code, § 5-1) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed
9-27-16; Am. Ord. 01-2017-08, passed 1-24-17; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-
21)
§ 91.002 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal to permit the animal
to run at large.
   (B)   Animal services officers shall take into custody any animal found at
large in the city and shall impound the animal in the animal shelter or such
other place as may be designated for the purposes of impoundment by the Animal
Services Division.
   (C)   Animal services officers shall have the authority to impound any
animal found running at large. Animal services officers are authorized to enter
property, other than a private dwelling, for the purpose of impoundment of an
animal in violation of this section.
('68 Code, § 5-10) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed
9-27-16 ; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21 ) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.003 NUISANCE ANIMALS.
   (A)    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly harbor or keep any
nuisance animal. A violation of this section is a Class C misdemeanor.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any animal on
his premises in such a manner as to endanger the public health, to annoy
neighbors by the accumulation of animal wastes which cause foul and offensive
odors or are considered to be a hazard to any other animal or human being, or
by continued presence on the premises of another.
   (C)   Animals defecating in public places.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of any
animal to permit, cause to permit, suffer or allow such animal to defecate upon
the sidewalk, parkway, or upon the floor of any common hall in any entranceway,
stairway or wall immediately abutting on a public office building or any area
open to or used in common by the public.
      (2)   Responsibility of owner. The owner of every animal shall be
responsible for the immediate removal of any excrement deposited by their
animal on public walks, roadways and other rights-of-way, recreation areas or
private property. Further every animal owner must have on their person the
tools for removal of excreta if their animal is observed defecating while being
walked or exercised.
   (D)   Maximum number of dogs and cats.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any residence to keep or harbor more than
either four adult dogs, four adult cats, or four adult dogs and cats in any
combination. A residence shall be permitted to keep only one litter of dogs or
cats per residence until the litter is of sufficient weaning age (depending on
species).
      (2)   Multi-pet permit. Any person desiring to keep more than four adult
dogs and/or cats or more than one litter of puppies or kittens at their
residence may apply with the Animal Services Division for a multi-pet permit.
The applicant shall pay an application fee at the time of filing.
      (3)   The Animal Service Division is authorized to issue such a permit if
the following conditions are met:
         (a)   An applicant provides the Animal Services Division with
information concerning the maximum number of animals to be kept at any one time
at such premises and a record search indicates that no enforcement action for
violations of this chapter has been necessary within the preceding 12 months;
and
         (b)   The Animal Services Division inspects the property; inspection
to include interviews with occupants of all immediately adjacent properties,
and at the sole discretion of the city as represented by the animal services
division deems it appropriate for housing multiple pets based on criteria
including, but not limited to:
            1.   Facilities shall be of sufficient size as to allow each animal
to move about freely. Size of the facility shall be in proportion to the size
of the individual animal’s height and weight.
            2.   Adequate food and water must be provided so that each and all
animals kept shall be maintained in good health and free of malnutrition and/or
dehydration.
            3.   The said premises shall be kept in a sanitary state and
reasonably free of conditions that may be a hazard to the animal’s health and/
or to the health of the general public.
            4.   The animals and the facility must be kept free of odor which
is offensive to a person of ordinary sensibilities.
            5.   The animals must be maintained in a manner which does not pose
a danger to the health of the animals themselves or adjacent animals.
            6.   The animals must not cause noise which is offensive or
disturbing to a person of ordinary sensibilities on adjoining or adjacent
premises.
            7.   All animal must be vaccinated and must wear current tags at
all times in accordance with this chapter.
      (4)   Such permit contemplated by this section may be revoked at any time
by the Animal Services Division if the conditions listed in division (D)(3) are
not met and/or a citation has been issued to the permit holder for any
violation of this chapter.
   (E)   Animal at large. It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance that an
owner of an animal or other person permits an animal to run at large.
('68 Code, § 5-11) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed
9-27-16; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.004 CONFINEMENT OF UNSPAYED FEMALE DOGS DURING ESTRUS.
   Any unspayed female dog in the state of estrus (i.e., “heat”) shall be
confined during such period of time in a house, building or secure enclosure
and said area of enclosure shall be so constructed that no other dog may gain
access to the confined dog. Owners who do not comply shall be ordered to remove
the dog in heat to a boarding kennel, veterinary hospital or animal shelter.
All expenses incurred as a result of the confinement shall be paid by the
owner. Failure to comply with the removal order of the animal services officer
shall be a violation of this chapter and the dog will then be impounded as
prescribed in this chapter.
('68 Code, § 5-12) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed
9-27-16 ; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21 ) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.005 ANIMALS INJURED ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   Animals injured on public property may be impounded and given adequate
veterinary medical treatment pending notification of the owner. If the injured
animal is treated and/or impounded, the owner of such animal shall be liable
for all expenses of the treatment and/or impoundment.
('68 Code, § 5-13) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed
9-27-16 ; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21 )
§ 91.006 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance that an owner or other
person harbors, keeps, or maintains a dangerous animal in the city unless the
owner complies with the requirements of this chapter and, with respect to dogs,
all state statutes regulating dangerous dogs.
   (B)    It shall be unlawful for a person who owns or keeps control of a
dangerous animal to fail to comply with any provision of this section or
applicable orders of the court. An offense under this subsection is a Class C
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000.
   (C)   An Animal Services Officer has authority to impound a dangerous animal
found running at large. If impoundment of a dangerous animal running at large
cannot be made with safety to the Animal Services Officer or other persons, the
animal may be destroyed without notice to the owner.
   (D)   Determination that animal is dangerous.
      (1)   When a person files a report of a dangerous animal or upon their
own instigation, an animal services officer shall investigate whether the
animal is a dangerous animal. If, after receiving the sworn statements of any
witnesses, the animal services officer determines that the animal is a
dangerous animal as defined in §
91.001 of this chapter, the animal services officer shall notify the owner in
writing of that determination.
      (2)    The animal control authority shall require the owner to deliver
the dangerous animal to the animal control authority not later than 72 hours
after the date on which the owner received the notice that the animal is a
dangerous animal. If the owner fails to deliver the animal, the municipal court
judge shall order the animal control authority to seize the animal, and the
municipal court judge shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure.
   (E)   Appeal of animal control authority’s determination.
      (1)   An owner, not later than the tenth day after the date the owner is
notified that an animal owned by the owner is a dangerous animal, may make a
written appeal of the determination of the animal services officer to the
municipal court of the city.
      (2)   To file an appeal, the owner must:
         (a)   File a notice of appeal of the animal services officer’s
dangerous animal determination with the court;
         (b)   Attach a copy of the determination of the animal services
officer; and
         (c)   Serve a copy of the notice of appeal on the animal services
division by mailing the notice through the United States Postal Service. For
purposes of this section, an appeal of the determination of the animal services
officer to the municipal court of the city shall be considered effective on the
date it is postmarked or hand-delivered to the municipal court of the city.
Upon timely receipt of an appeal, the municipal court shall schedule a hearing
in accordance with §
91.006(F) of this chapter.
      (3)   If an owner files an appeal, the owner must deliver the animal to
the Animal Services Division on the same day on which the owner files the
appeal. If the animal was already impounded with the Animal Services Division
for whatever reason, the animal shall remain impounded. The Animal Services
Division shall provide for the impoundment of the animal in secure and humane
conditions until the court orders the disposition of the animal. The owner
shall pay any cost incurred with impoundment of the animal.
      (4)   If the owner fails to deliver the dog as required by division (D)
(2), the court shall order the Animal Services Division to seize the animal and
shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The Animal Services Division
shall seize the animal and provide for the impoundment of the animal in secure
and humane conditions until the court orders the disposition of the animal. The
owner shall pay any cost incurred in seizing the animal.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful for a person to harbor, hide, transport, or
secure the transport of an animal for the purpose of preventing its impoundment
under this division (E).
   (F)   Hearing before the municipal court.
      (1)   The court, on receiving an appeal under division (E)(2) of this
chapter or an application under division (G)(3) of this chapter shall set a
time for a hearing to determine whether the animal is a dangerous animal or
whether the owner of the animal has complied with division (G)(1) of this
chapter.
      (2)   The hearing must be held not later than the tenth day after the
date on which the animal is seized or delivered.
      (3)   The court shall give written notice of the time and place of the
hearing to:
         (a)   The owner of the animal or the person from whom the animal was
seized; and
         (b)   The person who made the complaint.
      (4)   Any interested party, including the City Attorney, is entitled to
present evidence at the hearing.
      (5)   At the hearing, the court shall determine the estimated costs to
house and care for the impounded animal during the appeal process and shall set
the amount of bond for an appeal adequate to cover those estimated costs.
      (6)   An owner or person filing the action may appeal the decision of the
municipal court in the manner described by § 822.0424.
   (G)   Requirements for owner of dangerous animal.
      (1)   Not later than the tenth day after an owner receives final notice
that the animal is a dangerous animal, the owner shall:
         (a)   Register the dangerous animal with the Animal Services Division
and pay $100 annual dangerous animal registration fee;
         (b)   Obtain a certificate of registration, an identification tag that
is numbered and clearly marked "DANGEROUS ANIMAL", and a dangerous animal
collar from the animal control authority. Dangerous animal shall wear such
identification at all times;
         (c)   Post signage indicating "DANGEROUS ANIMAL ON PREMISES" on all
fencing areas accessible to the public. Signs must be a minimum of 8x12 inches
and clearly visible;
         (d)   Restrain the dangerous animal at all times on a leash in the
immediate control of a person over the age of 18 or in a secure enclosure. A
secure enclosure for this purpose shall be:
            1.   Locked;
            2.   Capable of preventing entry of the general public, including
children;
            3.   Capable of preventing the escape or release of an animal;
            4.   Clearly marked as containing a dangerous animal;
            5.   Enclosed by a secure top and sides with a solid bottom or
constructed in such a manner which would prevent the animal from tunneling
under the secure enclosure and escaping;
            6.   Protected from the elements adequately for the animal's humane
care;
            7.   The secure enclosure or pen shall be at least two square feet
per pound, per animal, so confined;
            8.   The structure must be species-appropriate; and
            9.   Secure enclosures shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
         (e)   Further secure the dangerous animal with a cage or basket muzzle
in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its
vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal
when the dangerous animal is taken off the property of the owner for any
reason;
         (f)   Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial
responsibility in an amount of at least $250,000 per incident, to cover damages
resulting from an attack by the dangerous animal causing bodily injury to a
person or another animal and provide proof thereof to the Animal Services
Division; and
         (g)   Spay or neuter the dangerous animal within ten days of final
determination and provide proof of sterilization to the animal control
authority within one business day after the surgery is performed.
      (2)   The owner of a dangerous animal who does not comply with division
(G)(1)(a) through (g) shall deliver the dangerous animal to the Animal Services
Division not later than the fifteenth day after the owner learns that the
animal is a dangerous animal.
      (3)   If, on application of any person, the municipal court finds, after
notice and hearing as provided by § 822.0423, that the owner of the dangerous
animal has failed to comply with divisions (G)(1)(a) through (g), the court
shall order the Animal Services Division to seize the dangerous animal and
shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The Animal Services Division
shall seize the dangerous animal and shall provide for the impoundment of the
animal in secure and humane conditions until the court orders disposition of
the animal.
      (4)   The owner of the animal shall pay any cost or fee assessed by the
city related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, or destruction of the
animal.
      (5)   The court shall order the Animal Services Division to humanely
destroy the animal if the owner has not complied with divisions (G)(1)(a)
through (g) before the eleventh day after the date on which the animal is
seized or delivered to the Animal Services Division, except that,
notwithstanding any other law or local regulation, the court may not order the
destruction of the animal during the pendency of an appeal under division (F)
(6) of this chapter.
      (6)   The court may order the humane destruction of the animal if the
owner of the animal has not been located before the fifteenth day after the
seizure and impoundment of the animal.
      (7)   For purposes of this section, a person learns that the person is
the owner of a dangerous animal when:
         (a)   The owner knows of an attack described in the definition of
dangerous animal in §
91.001 of this chapter;
         (b)   The owner receives notice that the municipal court has found
that the animal is a dangerous animal under §
91.006; or
         (c)   The owner is informed by the Animal Services Division that the
animal is a dangerous animal under §
91.006.
      (8)   It shall be unlawful for a person to harbor, hide, transport, or
secure the transport of an animal for the purpose of preventing its impoundment
under this division.
   (H)   Violations.
      (1)   A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous animal
commits an offense if:
         (a)   The person fails to comply with any provision of §
91.006; or
         (b)   The dangerous animal commits any action of a danergous animal as
defined in this chapter.
      (2)   A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a
dangerous animal and the dangerous animal makes an unprovoked attack on another
person outside the animal’s enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other
person. If a person is found guilty of this offense, the court may order the
dangerous animal be destroyed by a person listed in Tex. Health and Safety
Code, § 822.004.
      (3)   An offense under this division (H) is a Class C misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of up to $2,000, unless it is an attack by a dangerous dog
that causes serious bodily injury or death to a person, in which event such
attack by a dangerous dog is a felony as provided by § 822.005 of the Tex.
Health and Safety Code.
   (I)   Notifications.
      (1)   If an owner of a dangerous animal sells or moves that animal to a
new address, the owner, not later than the tenth day after the date of the sale
or move, shall notify the animal services division. If ownership of the
dangerous animal changes, the former owner shall provide the animal control
authority with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner. If the
new owner's address is within the city limits or if the dangerous animal is
kept within the city limits, the animal control authority shall notify the new
owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, or in person that the animal
has been determined to be a dangerous animal and provide the new owner a copy
of the requirements contained in this section. It shall be unlawful for new
owners to fail to comply with any requirements of this section. The same
reporting and registration requirements are imposed on any and all subsequent
owners of the dangerous animal.
      (2)   The owner of a dangerous animal shall notify the Animal Services
Division within 24 hours if:
         (a)   The dangerous animal makes an attack on a human being or another
animal;
         (b)   The dangerous animal is at large or unconfined; or
         (c)   The dangerous animal has died.
('68 Code, § 5-14) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed
9-27-16; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.007 GUARD DOGS.
   It shall be unlawful to place or maintain any dog which has been
specifically trained to attack in any area, for the protection of persons or
property, unless the dog is physically confined to a specific area that is not
freely accessible or open to the public or is under complete and absolute
control. The area or premises in which a guard dog is confined must be
conspicuously posted with warning signs bearing letters not less than two
inches high.
('68 Code, § 5-15) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed
9-27-16 ; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21 ) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.008 BEEKEEPING, LOCATION RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or raise bees within the
limits of the city in any district where there are at least four occupied
dwelling houses within 600 feet of the place where such bees are owned, kept or
raised.
('68 Code, § 5-23) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed
9-27-16 ; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21 ) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.009 FOWL RUNNING AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any chickens, turkeys, geese,
ducks or pigeons or other fowls owned or under their control to be or run at
large upon the highways, streets, or alleys of the city or upon premises owned
or occupied by other persons, without the consent of such other persons, within
the city limits.
('68 Code, § 5-24) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed
9-27-16 ; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21 ) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.010 KEEPING OF HOGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or have any hogs or pigs in any
lot, yard, pen, pasture or any other place within the city.
('68 Code, § 5-25) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed
9-27-16; Am. Ord. 01-2017-08, passed 1-24-17; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-
21) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.011 MAINTENANCE OF PENS, STABLES AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall own, maintain or use any pen, stable or enclosure in which
cattle or any other animals are kept in such manner as to become offensive or
an annoyance to any person whatever.
('68 Code, § 5-26) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed
9-27-16 ; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21 ) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.012 REQUIREMENTS ON KEEPING LIVESTOCK AND FOWL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep or harbor any livestock or
fowl within the corporate limits of the city in any pen, stable, shed, pasture
or enclosure, if any part of such enclosure or structure is within 200 feet
from an occupied building.
   (B)   The keeping of livestock within the zoning classifications SF-
1 through SF-4, and SF-4/MH is prohibited, except goats, horses, and mules
provided that the following applicable provision(s) is complied with:
      (1)   Tracts of land of less than ten acres that are zoned as "SF-
1 through SF-4" may maintain horses and/or mules at a rate of two head for the
first full acre under fence and an additional one head per fenced acre
thereafter.
      (2)   Goats may be maintained at a rate of four head for the first full
acre under fence and an additional one head per half acre thereafter;
      (3)   Pasture fencing must be a minimum of five feet in height at its
lowest point and cannot extend into the front yard between the main building
structure and the street;
      (4)   Horses and/or mules kept on land zoned as "SF" shall be provided
with a minimum three-sided shelter, approved by the city, with a minimum of 200
square feet per animal.
   (C)   Keeping of certain fowl.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (C), fowl shall be limited to
female chickens (hens).
      (2)   This division does not apply if the land upon which the animals are
maintained is zoned "A - Agricultural".
      (3)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly:
         (a)   Keeps or maintains a rooster;
         (b)   Keeps or maintains more than six fowl;
         (c)   Keeps or maintains fowl in an inadequate fowl shelter, including
the fenced run, at a distance closer than 25 feet of an occupied building of a
person other than the owner;
         (d)   Fails to provide an adequate fowl shelter as defined in §
91.001;
         (e)   Keeps or maintains fowl in the front yard area;
         (f)   Fails to provide fowl with fresh, clean water and food;
         (g)   Fails to store fowl feed in secure containers protected from
rodents, insects and other animals;
         (h)   Slaughters fowl within the city limits;
         (i)   Fails to keep or maintain fowl within a fowl shelter, pen, coop
or hutch as defined in §
91.001. A fenced yard shall not qualify as a pen, coop or hutch;
         (j)   Sells eggs for profit. Any eggs produced by fowl permitted under
this section shall be for personal use only;
         (k)   Fails to allow an animal control officer to inspect the fowl
shelter, pen, coop, or hutch and related premises.
   (D)   The owner or person in possession of animals shall keep yards, pens,
coops, and enclosures in which these animals are confined in such a manner so
as not to give off odors offensive to persons of ordinary sensibilities
residing in the vicinity, or to breed or attract flies, mosquitoes, or other
noxious insects, or in any manner to endanger the public health or safety, or
create a public nuisance. All persons keeping these animals shall comply with
the following sanitary regulations: manure and droppings shall be removed from
pens, yards, cages and other enclosures daily, and handled or disposed of in
such manner as to keep the premises free of any nuisance.
   (E)   The slaughter of livestock shall be prohibited within the city limits
unless performed by a licensed professional at a rendering or meat processing
facility.
   (F)   It is an exception to this section that:
      (1)   The animal or structure was at a veterinary clinic or hospital, pet
store, feed store, farm store, school building, or any similar establishment
properly zoned for keeping these animals;
      (2)   The structure, pen, corral or other enclosure was in existence at
the time the premises on which it is located were annexed by the city. However,
if the ownership or primary use of the premises changes, this exception shall
not apply;
      (3)   The structure, pen, corral or other enclosure was in existence
prior to the time a habitation was erected on another’s property; or
      (4)   The livestock was purchased and housed prior to January 1, 2005.
(Ord. 01-2005-09, passed 1-25-05; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed 9-27-16; Am. Ord.
01-2017-08, passed 1-24-17; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.013 SALE OR KEEPING OF CERTAIN PROHIBITED ANIMALS.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person imports, offers for sale,
keeps, maintains, harbors or permits in the city any of the following animals:
      (1)   A lion;
      (2)   A tiger;
      (3)   An ocelot;
      (4)   A cougar;
      (5)   A leopard;
      (6)   A cheetah;
      (7)   A jaguar;
      (8)   A bobcat;
      (9)   A lynx;
      (10)   A serval:
      (11)   A caracal;
      (12)   A hyena;
      (13)   A bear;
      (14)   A coyote;
      (15)   A jackal;
      (16)   A baboon;
      (17)   A chimpanzee;
      (18)   An orangutan;
      (19)   A gorilla;
      (20)   A skunk;
      (21)   A raccoon;
      (22)   A panther;
      (23)   A fox;
      (24)   A rooster;
      (25)   Any hybrid of an animal listed in this section;
      (26)   Any poisonous reptile; or
      (27)   Any other wild animal capable of or inclined to do serious bodily
harm to humans or other animals or fowl.
   (B)   Exception. A temporary permit may be issued to temporarily house and
display a prohibited animal or hazardous animal for educational purposes,
provided the following conditions are met:
      (1)   Application.
         (a)   Deadline. An application for that purpose must be submitted to
the animal control authority no less than ten working days prior to the
intended time for the exhibit;
         (b)   Contents of application. The application form shall include the
name, address and telephone number(s) of the applicant; the applicant’s
ownership interest in the animal and the educational display or program; the
proposed location and duration of the education display or program and the
name, address and telephone number(s) of the owner or lessee of that location;
a general description of the animal, including age, date of birth if known, the
classification of the animal, and a description of the confinement plan, and
any information about the vicious or dangerous propensities of such animal,
including any prior history of any incidents; and a description of the exhibit
or program, including any confinement plan and housing arrangements for the
animal.
      (2)   Insurance. Applicant must have liability insurance and must provide
proof of liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility in an amount
of at least $250,000 which amount may be increased if needed to cover damages,
injury, or death resulting from the animal(s) to be in effect during the
duration of the temporary permit.
      (3)   Approval. Approval of the application for temporary permit is
within the sole discretion of the animal services division as a representative
of the city.
      (4)   Terms of permit. The applicant must abide by all terms of the
permit.
      (5)   Revocation of permit. The permit may be revoked if it is determined
that the applicant did not fully and truthfully disclose all required
information, or if the applicant does not abide by the terms of the temporary
permit, or if it is reasonably necessary to protect against an immediate threat
or danger to the public health or safety.
('68 Code, §§ 5-30, 5-32) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 10-2001-77,
passed 10-9-01; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed 9-27-16 ; Am. Ord. 01-2017-08,
passed 1-24-17; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.014 INHUMANE TREATMENT.
   (A)   Cruelty to animals. It is prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any
person to knowingly or intentionally commit or cause to be committed any act of
cruelty, harassment, or torture of any animal or cause such animal to be
mutilated or inhumanely killed. Ownership, or the commission of such acts of
cruelty on private property, shall not be justifiable defense for violation of
this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to unreasonably withhold
food, water, shelter, or veterinary care from any animal such that the animal’s
health is endangered or it is caused to unduly suffer.
   (B)   Owner's duty to provide food, shelter, and care. The owner or person
who has custody or control of any animal shall:
      (1)   Keep the animal in clean, sanitary, and healthy condition; and
      (2)   Provide the animal sufficient nutritious and wholesome food, served
to the animal in clean containers, to maintain the animal's good health; and
      (3)   Provide the animal constant and adequate supply of fresh, clean,
potable water served from a clean container that keeps the animal hydrated for
environmental conditions; and
      (4)   Provide the animal care and veterinarian medical treatment for
injuries, parasites, and disease that is sufficient to maintain the animal in
good health and minimize and prevent suffering; and
      (5)   Maintain the animal's shelter (pens, kennels, coops, fenced areas
and enclosures of any kind) in sanitary condition, including, but not limited
to:
         (a)   Disposing all animal waste promptly; and
         (b)   All pens and enclosures shall be cleaned as needed to prevent
odors and not attract insects or other vermin or create a nuisance; and
      (6)   Provide the animal with adequate shelter.
   (C)   Poisoning. It is prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to
poison any domestic animal or to distribute poison or toxicant on public or
private property in any manner whatsoever with the intent of poisoning any
domestic animal.
   (D)   Abandoning animals, alive or dead. It is prohibited and shall be
unlawful for any person to intentionally release, abandon or discard a dog, cat
or any other animal in their custody, alive or dead, in the city limits. Any
animal released, abandoned, or discarded at a city animal control facility
without city consent shall become the property of the city and may be adopted
out or disposed of in accordance with § 91.036 at the city's sole discretion.
   (E)   Cropping, docking, or castrating. It shall be unlawful for a person
other than a licensed veterinarian to crop a dog's ears, dock an animal's tail;
or castrate an animal; provided, however, that this division shall not apply to
normal livestock operations occurring within the city.
   (F)   Striking animal with vehicle. The operator of any motor vehicle which
strikes or injures a domesticated animal shall stop and immediately render aid
if safe to do so and report such incident to the animal control authority or
the police.
   (G)   Hunting and trapping. No person may hunt, trap, wound, kill, maim,
torture or otherwise threaten the health and safety of any indigenous wild
animal in the city limits of Cleburne, excluding the trapping of nuisance
wildlife under the authorization and supervision of the animal control
authority; also excluding any person who holds a seasonal hunting license for a
species for which there exists a hunting season, and that person's hunting
activities occur on property which is properly zoned, and property owner's
permission has been granted for such activity; or a person holds proper permits
issued by the animal control authority, Texas Parks and Wildlife, and/or USDA
Wildlife Services.
   (H)   Seizure. The animal control authority shall liberally utilize the
authority granted by Tex. Health and Safety Code § 821.022 to seize and impound
any animal, if the animal control authority has reason to believe that an
animal has been or is being cruelly treated, pending a hearing before the
municipal court on the issues of cruelty and disposition of the animal. Seizure
of the subject animal prior to receiving a warrant is hereby authorized if such
delay endangers the life of or would unreasonably prolong the suffering of the
subject animal.
   (I)   Ownership prohibited. It is prohibited and shall be unlawful for any
person who has had animals seized for inhumane treatment, where a ruling was
made in a court of law that upheld the determination by the animal control
authority, to own, harbor, possess, have custody or control over, or provide a
premise to which an animal returns for food, shelter, or care within the
corporate city limits of Cleburne.
('68 Code, § 5-33(a)-(c)) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47,
passed 9-27-16; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.015 DISPLAY OR SALE OF DYED OR IMMATURE ANIMALS.
   It is prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to possess,
display, sell, barter or give away dyed, colored or in any way artificially
treated baby chicks, ducklings, fowl, rabbits or any animals as pets,
playthings, novelties, gifts, or for any other purpose. This section shall be
construed to prohibit their display by hatcheries, stores, owners, dealers, or
persons engaged in the business of selling such immature animals to be raised
for food.
('68 Code, § 5-33(d)) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47,
passed 9-27-16 ; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21 ) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.016 FIGHTING ANIMALS.
   It is prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to cause, instigate
or encourage any dog or other animal to fight with another animal of its own
species or with another animal of a different species. It shall be unlawful for
any person to train or keep any dog or other animal for the purpose of
fighting. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a place where any dog
or other animal is permitted to fight for exhibition or for wager or for sport.
('68 Code, § 5-33(e)) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47,
passed 9-27-16 ; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21 ) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.017 DISPLAYING FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person advertises, displays,
transfers ownership, or offers to transfer ownership of any live animal for a
commercial purpose on any roadside, public right-of-way, commercial parking
lot, city-owned property, or property on which a lawful swap market/flea market
is operating. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, female
fowl (hens), rabbits, goats or sheep may be sold at a lawfully operating swap
market/flea market.
   (B)   No owner or person shall advertise, display, transfer ownership or
offer to transfer ownership of any dog, cat, or ferret over four months of age
that is not currently vaccinated against rabies.
   (C)   A releasing agency, with written permission from the Animal Services
Manager, may transfer ownership of animals provided that the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   All other provisions of this chapter are complied with;
      (2)   All displayed animals are sterilized;
      (3)   All displayed animals over three months of age have been vaccinated
against rabies in accordance with this chapter;
      (4)   All displayed animals have been implanted with a microchip; and
      (5)   The agency keeps a record for each animal adopted, including the
contact information of each new owner and the microchip information and proof
of vaccination and sterilization for each animal adopted.
   (D)   A person commits an offense if he advertises, displays, transfers
ownership, or offers to transfer ownership of more than 12 animals or more than
two litters, clutches, or other groups of offspring (whichever is greater) of
any breeding animal during any 12 consecutive month period to another person
for the purpose of breeding, show, personal pet, or resale to a third person,
without first obtaining a commercial breeder permit, unless the owner or person
is a governmental agency acting in an official capacity or a releasing agency
acting in accordance with all other provisions of this chapter. This section
does not apply to livestock.
   (E)   A person commits an offense if he advertises, displays, transfers
ownership, or offers to transfer ownership of any live animal on any roadside,
public right-of-way, or city owned property without written permission from the
Animal Services Manager.
   (F)   A person commits an offense if the person receives any live animal
through sale, trade, barter, lease, rent, or give away conducted on any
roadside, public right-of-way, commercial parking lot, city-owned property, or
property on which a lawful swap market/flea market is operating.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, female fowl (hens),
rabbits, goats, or sheep may be purchased at a lawfully operating swap market/
flea market.
   (G)   A person commits an offense if the person receives any live animal
from an owner or person that has not complied with §
91.017(B) through (F) herein.
(Ord. 02-2007-14, passed 2-27-07; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed 9-27-16; Am. Ord.
07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.018 LEAVING ANIMAL UNATTENDED IN VEHICLE.
   (A)   A person having charge or custody of an animal shall not place or
confine such animal or allow such animal to be placed or confined in a motor
vehicle or trailer under such conditions or for such a period of time as may
endanger the health of the animal due to heat, lack of food or water, or such
other circumstances as may cause injury or death of the animal.
   (B)   It is presumed that an animal’s health, safety, or welfare is
endangered when the animal is confined in a parked or standing vehicle, without
the engine running or climate control system engaged, or in a trailer for a
period of five minutes or more when the ambient outside air temperature
measures above 80°F or below 35°F.
   (C)   An animal services officer or police officer finding an animal being
held in violation of this provision may cite the owner for violating this
chapter, obtain a search warrant pursuant to state or Federal law, or use
reasonable force to remove an animal from the vehicle whenever it appears the
animal’s health or safety is, or soon will be endangered.
   (D)   The rescued animal shall be impounded and held pending a hearing. It
shall be the responsibility of the animal’s owner to repair any damage caused
by the removal of the animal from the dangerous situation by the animal
services officer or police officer.
(Ord. 09-2016-47, passed 9-27-16 ; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21 )
§ 91.019 IRRESPONSIBLE PET OWNER.
   (A)   A pet owner that has violated this chapter three or more times and/or
surrendered two or more litters from offspring of their unaltered pets within a
period of two years shall be considered an irresponsible pet owner and shall be
penalized in one or more of the following ways:
      (1)   The owner shall be ordered to spay/neuter all animals under their
care within 14 days of being deemed an irresponsible pet owner, and any animals
owned, kept, or harbored from the date of declaration forward;
      (2)   The city may, in addition to the requirement of §
91.037 require that the animal be spayed or neutered prior to the release of
the animal to the owner, if the animal(s) is being held at the animal shelter;
and
      (3)   The Animal Services Division shall have authority to have the
animal spayed or neutered under the auspices of the Cleburne Animal Shelter and
the fees for the procedure will be assessed to the owner and required to be
paid prior to the release of the animal to the owner; and/or
      (4)   The owner shall be fined up to $500 upon the first conviction for
violation of the City of Cleburne Code of Ordinances
Ch. 91 and/or failure to comply with §
91.019;
      (5)   A subsequent violation of the City of Cleburne Code of Ordinances
Ch. 91 and/or failure to comply with §
91.019 will result in a fine of $1,000 per offense;
      (6)   Upon the third violation of
Ch. 91 and/or §
91.019, the owner shall be fined $2,000 per offense and the court may order the
Animal Services Division to seize the animals and shall issue a warrant
authorizing the seizure. The Animal Services Division shall seize the animal(s)
and provide for the impoundment of the animal(s) in secure and humane
conditions until the court orders the disposition of the animal(s). Any such
impoundment shall comply with the provisions of §
91.037. The owner shall pay any cost incurred in seizing the animal including
court ordered penalties and fines.
   (B)   It is prohibited and shall be unlawful for any person who has had
animals seized for violations of an Irresponsible Pet Owner order, where a
ruling was made in a court of law that upheld the determination by the animal
control authority, to own, harbor, possess, have custody and control over, or
provide a premise to which an animal returns for food, shelter, or care within
the corporate city limits of Cleburne.
   (C)   An animal services officer, police officer, city or county prosecutor,
or private person may submit a written complaint to the Animal Services
Division for a declaration that a person is an irresponsible pet owner and that
he or she be penalized as provided herein.
      (1)   Upon receipt of written complaint the Animal Services Division will
conduct an Irresponsible Pet Owner investigation. If, after receiving the sworn
statements of any witnesses, the animal services manager determines that the
owner is an irresponsible pet owner, the animal services manager shall notify
the owner in writing of that determination.
      (2)   An owner, not later than the tenth day after the date the owner is
notified that they have been deemed an irresponsible pet owner, may make a
written appeal of the determination of the animal services manager to the
municipal court of the city.
   (D)   At the appeal hearing, the court may admit into evidence all relevant
evidence, including but not limited to prior convictions, incident reports and
written complaints of witnesses. The court may find, upon a preponderance of
the evidence, that the owner is an irresponsible pet owner and, upon such
finding, shall impose the penalty or penalties provided in division (A) hereof.
If the court finds that the owner is not an irresponsible pet owner, no
penalties shall be imposed.
   (E)   Pets surrendered or impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be
adopted or transferred-out if possible, or else shall be euthanized. Any such
impoundment shall comply with the provisions of §
91.037.
   (F)   Surrender of an animal(s) by any method specified herein does not
relieve the irresponsible pet owner of liability for violations and any accrued
charges.
   (G)   A violation of a court order made under division (D) hereof shall be
punishable as a contempt of court in addition to any other penalties under this
or any other law. The court may order the Animal Services Division to seize the
animals and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The Animal Services
Division shall seize the animal(s) and provide for the impoundment of the
animal(s) in secure and humane conditions until the court orders the
disposition of the animal(s). Any such impoundment shall comply with the
provisions of §
91.037. The owner shall pay any cost incurred in seizing the animal including
court ordered penalties and fines.
   (H)   An owner may appeal the decision of the municipal court in the manner
described by law for all other appeals from municipal court.
   (I)   The provisions hereof shall be in addition to any other civil,
criminal or administrative laws, regulations or causes of action against the
owner of the pet or any other person, firm, corporation or governmental entity
or employee.
(Ord. 09-2016-47, passed 9-27-16; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21)
§ 91.020 ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT - PERMIT REQUIRED.
   An animal establishment that is in operation before the effective date of
this chapter shall have 180 days from the effective date of this chapter to
obtain the necessary permits and registrations.
   (A)   Persons wishing to operate an animal establishment within the city
must apply for an animal establishment permit. A permit shall be issued
annually if the requisite fee is paid and the applicant meets the following
requirements per an annual inspection:
      (1)   Water and appropriate disinfecting/sanitizing chemicals for washing
and disinfecting cages are easily accessible to all parts of the animal housing
areas;
      (2)   Fresh water shall be available to all animals at all times.
Containers are to be cleaned and disinfected each day. All water containers
shall be removable for cleaning and mounted, placed or weighted so the animal
cannot turn them over;
      (3)   The ambient temperature in the animal housing areas is maintained
between 60-79°F at all times. The temperature and humidity in individual cages
are maintained at levels that are healthful for the species of animals being
housed and adequate ventilation is maintained in all animal housing areas;
      (4)   All cages and enclosures are constructed of a nonporous material
for easy cleaning and disinfecting. Each cage and enclosure is of sufficient
size that at minimum the animal will have room to stand, turn, and lie down in
a natural position. Each cage and enclosure is thoroughly cleaned and
disinfected each day. Each cage and enclosure is locked or otherwise secured to
prevent the escape of any animal being kept. Injured or ill animals shall be
kept isolated from healthy animals;
      (5)   Daily feeding records are maintained to ensure that all animals are
fed a proper and nutritious diet specific to the species’ needs. The daily
feeding records shall be maintained or posted in a readily accessible location.
All veterinarian’s orders must be in writing and kept on record and available
for inspection during the Animal Establishment’s regular business hours. In
general, all animals under six months of age are to be fed at least two times
per 24-hour period, or as advised by a veterinarian, and all other animals must
be fed at least one time per 24-hour period, or as advised by a veterinarian.
Food for each animal shall be served in a clean dish so constructed or mounted
that the animal cannot readily tip it over and be of the type that are
removable for cleaning. Disposable feeding dishes acceptable for one-time use
only. Animals that do not require daily feedings are exempt from the daily
feeding requirement; however, feeding records shall be maintained and the
animal shall be kept in a healthful body condition;
      (6)   Each bird must have sufficient room to stand upright without
touching the top of their housing area and to spread their wings fully without
touching the side of their housing area. Each bird shall have access to a perch
that is placed horizontal to other perches in the same cage and is of adequate
size for the species being housed. The housing area must be sufficiently
ventilated. Large birds shall have separate cages from smaller birds. There
shall be clean water and suitable food available to the birds and placed so
that the birds cannot turn them over or defile their contents. Injured,
diseased, or dead birds shall be immediately removed from housing areas holding
healthy birds;
      (7)   There is sufficient clean, dry bedding to meet needs of each
individual animal;
      (8)   All animals are fed and watered, and all cages cleaned and
disinfected every day including Sundays and holidays;
      (9)   All dogs, cats, and ferrets four months of age or older have proof
of being currently vaccinated against rabies;
      (10)   Meets the requirements of this chapter and those set forth by the
Tex. Health and Safety Code.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if he is the owner of an animal
establishment and has a permit issued under this section and refuses upon
request by the animal services division, to make their animals, the portion of
the premises that house or is used to service the animal, equipment, and any
necessary registrations, veterinary records, feeding logs or permits available
for inspection during regular business hours. If there are no set business
hours, then the inspection may occur during reasonable hours.
   (C)   A person commits an offense if he has a permit under this section and
fails to meet the conditions set forth in division (A). Each separate condition
that is not met shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 09-2016-47, passed 9-27-16 ; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21 )
§ 91.021 POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITIZENS.
   Any person who finds an animal which he does not own on property that he
owns or exercises control over or on public property may take control of said
animal if it is at large and deliver the animal to an animal services officer
or the Cleburne Animal Shelter. If the animal is not delivered to an animal
services officer or to Cleburne Animal Shelter, the person must report that he
has taken control of the animal to an animal services officer or the animal
shelter within 72 hours. If the animal is wearing a tag of any kind or has a
tattoo, brand, microchip or other identifying mark, that information shall be
included in the report to the animal services officer or animal shelter. It
shall be unlawful for a person to release, give away, sell, barter, or trade
any found stray animal to another person that is not the owner of the animal.
(Ord. 07-2021-31, passed 7-13-21)
§ 91.022 FEEDING OF ANIMALS PROHIBITED, EXCEPTIONS, AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to feed wild animals, stray
animals or feral/community cats, regardless of age, sex or temperament. It
shall also be unlawful for any person to place food of any kind with the intent
to feed wild animals, stray animals or feral/community cats or to leave, store
or maintain food of any kind in a manner or area accessible to wild animals,
stray animals or feral/community cats, including:
      (1)   On any vacant or undeveloped property or tract of land in any
zoning area.
      (2)   On property not owned or occupied by the person feeding or
attempting to feed said wild animals, stray animals or feral/community cats.
      (3)   On any fenced or unfenced property, even if owned or occupied by
the person feeding or attempting to feed said wild animals, stray animals or
feral/community cats.
      (4)   This section shall not apply to: animal services officers or police
officers for the City of Cleburne during the course of their official duties or
a person caring for an infant or injured wild animal that that is not capable
of surviving on its own and said person possesses a valid Texas State Parks and
Wildlife Rehabilitation Permit and said wild animal is kept in a secure manner
and in accordance with all other city ordinances and state laws.
      (5)   This section shall not apply to: approved zoological parks,
performing animal exhibitions or licensed circuses, primary and secondary
schools, colleges and universities or zoological parks owned or operated by a
governmental entity, provided that any such wildlife is kept in a secure manner
and in accordance with all other city ordinances and state laws.
      (6)   This section shall not apply to birdfeeders used for the sole
purpose of feeding wild birds within the boundaries of a person's owned or
occupied property, or the feeding of water fowl within Cleburne city parks.
      (7)   This section shall not apply to: any person who is using food as an
attractant to live trap a wild animal, a stray animal or a feral/community cat
in a legally authorized or permitted manner.
   (B)   If upon investigation, an animal services officer or police officer
for the City of Cleburne, determines that a person is in violation of this
section, the animal services officer or police officer at their discretion, may
issue a warning or citation and time frame for compliance to said person. Each
day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21)
§ 91.023 UNLAWFUL TETHERING.
   (A)   Lawful restraint or tethering of an animal is as follows:
      (1)   An animal restrained to a running line, pulley, or trolley system
that is not restrained to the running line, pulley, or trolley system by means
of a pinch-type, prong-type, or choke-type or improperly fitted collar.
Livestock are exempt from this provision;
      (2)   An animal restrained in compliance with the requirements of a
camping or recreational area as defined by a federal, state, or local authority
or jurisdiction;
      (3)   An animal restrained for no longer than is necessary for the owner
to complete a temporary task that requires the animal to be restrained;
      (4)   An animal restrained while the owner is engaged in, or actively
training for, an activity that is conducted pursuant to a valid license issued
by this state if the activity for which the license is issued is associated
with the use or presence of an animal;
      (5)   An animal restrained while the owner is engaged in conduct directly
related to the business of shepherding or herding cattle or livestock; or
      (6)   An animal restrained while the owner is engaged in conduct directly
related to the business of cultivating agricultural products, if the restraint
is reasonably necessary for the safety of the animal.
      (7)   Restraint of an animal occurs while the animal is within the
owner's direct physical control.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit a person from walking a dog with a
handheld leash.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tie or tether a dog to a
stationary object. Dogs must be tethered on a trolley or cable run system to
prevent unhealthy or potentially dangerous situations as determined by the
animal control authority.
   (D)   A person commits an offense if he tethers, chains, or otherwise
secures an animal by or under any of the following methods or circumstances:
      (1)   In such a manner that the animal is capable of moving within 15
feet of any public right-of-way, park, or other public land, including
sidewalks, or within five feet of any privately or commercially owned property
when such tether is stretched to its full length;
      (2)   In such a manner as to cause the animal injury or pain or to not
permit the animal access to shelter, food, shade, and/or water or otherwise
create an inhumane situation;
      (3)   In such a manner whereby the animal is subject to harassment,
stings or bites from outdoor insects, or attacks by other animals;
      (4)   To tether or restrain the animal in an area that is not properly
fenced so as to prevent any person or child from entering the area occupied by
said animal;
      (5)   To tether any animal with a tether that is not equipped with swivel
ends;
      (6)   In such a manner that prevents the animal from becoming entangled
with any obstruction;
      (7)   To fail to remove waste from the tethered area on a daily basis;
      (8)   To restrain an animal without using a properly fitted collar or
harness which prevents the animal from becoming entangled with any obstruction,
from partially or completely jumping any fence, or from leaving the owner's
property;
      (9)   To tether with a choke, pinch, or prong type collar of any sort;
      (10)   To use a restraint that weighs more than one tenth of the animal's
body weight;
      (11)   In such a manner that is not in accordance with division (A) of
this section.
   (E)   Animals directly involved in law enforcement activities or training
are exempt from these provisions.
(Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21)
RABIES CONTROL; ANIMAL BITES
§ 91.025 RABIES CONTROL.
   (A)   Control authority.  In the city the rabies control authority shall be
the City Police Department or the animal services division.
   (B)   Vaccinations.  Every owner of a dog or cat four months of age or older
shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies. Annual revaccination shall be
required thereafter. Any person moving into the city from a location outside of
the city shall comply with this chapter within ten days after having moved into
the city.
   (C)   Certificate of vaccination. Upon vaccination the veterinarian shall
execute and furnish to the owner of the dog or cat, as evidence thereof, a
certificate upon a form furnished by the veterinarian. The veterinarian shall
retain a duplicate copy. Such certificate shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   Owner’s name, address and telephone number.
      (2)   Animal identification: species, age, sex, size (in pounds),
predominant breed, and colors.
      (3)   Vaccine used, producer, expiration date and serial number.
      (4)   Date vaccinated.
      (5)   Rabies tag number.
      (6)   Veterinarian's signature and license number.
   (D)   Tag. Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the certificate of
vaccination referred to in division (C) of this section, the owner of the dog
shall cause to be attached to the collar or harness of the vaccinated dog a
metal tag, serially numbered to correspond with the vaccination certificate
number and bearing the year of issuance, the name of the issuing veterinarian
and the business address of the issuing veterinarian.
   (E)   Duplicate tags. In the event of loss or destruction of the original
tag provided for in division (D) of this section, the owner of the dog shall
obtain a duplicate tag.
   (F)   Proof of vaccination. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or
harbors a vaccinated dog or cat to fail or refuse to exhibit their copy of the
certificate of vaccination upon demand to any person charged with the
enforcement of this chapter.
   (G)   Harboring unvaccinated animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to
harbor any dog or cat which has not been vaccinated against rabies as provided
herein or which cannot be identified as having a current vaccination
certificate.
   (H)   Animals exposed to rabies. Any person having knowledge of the
existence of any animal known to have been or suspected of being exposed to
rabies must immediately report such knowledge to the Animal Services Division
or Police Department giving such information as may be required. For any animal
known to have been or suspected of being exposed to rabies, the following rules
must apply:
      (1)   Unvaccinated animals which have been bitten or directly exposed by
physical contact with a rabid animal or its fresh tissues shall be:
         (a)   Humanely killed; or
         (b)   If sufficient justification for preserving the animal exists and
if the owner of such animal elects, the owner may, at their expense, in the
manner prescribed by the Police Department or Animal Services Division, confine
the animal. The exposed animal should be vaccinated immediately against rabies,
placed in strict isolation for three months and given a booster vaccination one
month prior to release from isolation.
      (2)   Vaccinated animals which have been bitten or otherwise
significantly exposed to a rabid animal shall be:
         (a)   Humanely killed; or
         (b)   Revaccinated immediately and confined, at the owner’s expense.
The exposed vaccinated animal should be given a booster rabies vaccination and
placed in strict isolation for 45 days.
      (3)   These provisions apply only to domestic animals for which an
approved rabies vaccine is available.
('68 Code, § 5-2) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed
9-27-16 ; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21 ) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.026 REPORTING BITES FROM ANIMALS SUSCEPTIBLE TO RABIES.
   (A)   Duty to report. Any person having knowledge that an animal has bitten
a human shall immediately report the incident to the Police Department or
animal services division. Every physician or other medical practitioner who
treats a person or persons for such bites shall within 24 hours report such
treatment to the Police Department or Animal Services Division giving name,
age, sex, and precise location of the bitten person or persons and such other
information as the police or animal services officers may require.
   (B)   Exclusions. Human bites from rodents, rabbits, birds and reptiles are
excluded from the reporting requirements of this section.
   (C)   Suspect rabies. Any veterinarian who clinically diagnoses rabies or
any person who suspects rabies in a dog, cat or other domestic or wild animal
shall immediately report the incident to the Police Department or animal
services division stating precisely where such animal may be found. If a known
or suspected rabid animal bites or attacks a human or a domestic animal, such
incident shall also be reported as required.
('68 Code, § 5-3(a)-(c)) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47,
passed 9-27-16 ; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21 ) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.027 PROCEDURES FOR OTHER ANIMAL BITES.
   Procedures concerning bites from other animals shall be discussed with the
animal services officer or the State Department of Health for proper
disposition. Any wild animal which has bitten a person should be caught and
killed and the brain immediately submitted to a qualified laboratory for rabies
examination. An exception to this rule may be allowed for large, exotic, or
valuable zoo species which, by reason of their close confinement, would be
unlikely rabies vectors. Rodents, rabbits, birds and reptiles are not
considered to be transmitters of the rabies virus and should not be submitted
for laboratory examination for rabies.
('68 Code, § 5-3(f) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47,
passed 9-27-16 ; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21 ) Penalty, see §
91.999
IMPOUNDMENT; ANIMAL SHELTER
§ 91.035 ANIMAL SHELTER ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   There is hereby created and established an Animal Shelter Advisory
Board for the city. It shall be composed of at least one licensed veterinarian,
one county or municipal official, one person whose duties include the daily
operation of an Animal Shelter, one representative from an animal welfare
organization, and three citizens selected at large. Members shall hold office
at the pleasure of the Council; provided, however, that the term of office
shall in no event, without reappointment, exist for a longer period than two
years. Initial terms shall be staggered in order to provide continuity and
effectiveness. The animal welfare organization representative shall be exempt
from the residency requirement in §
31.03 of the Code of Ordinance.
   (B)   Members of the Animal Shelter Advisory Board shall serve without
compensation.
   (C)   Immediately after their appointment by the City Council, the members
of the Animal Shelter Advisory Board shall meet and organize, by electing a
chairman and a secretary. The Chairman shall preside over all meetings and may
appoint another member to preside in the chairman’s absence. The Secretary
shall reduce the proceedings of the Board to writing and shall provide a record
of such proceedings to the City Council for their information and
consideration. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. The Board shall establish such rules and regulations
for its government as in its judgment may be deemed necessary and proper to
carry out its responsibility under law.
   (D)   The Board shall meet at least three times per year, and shall hold
such additional meetings as it deems necessary. The Mayor, the Chairman or the
Chief of Police may at any time call the Board together for advice on any
matter which they might deem important.
   (E)   It is hereby made the duty and province of the Animal Shelter Advisory
Board to assist the city in compliance with Tex. Health and Safety Code, Ch.
823 as it now exists or may be amended from time to time.
   (F)   The Animal Shelter Advisory Board shall not contract for the
expenditure of any money, unless same is authorized by the city, and shall not
have the authority to hire or discharge any employee.
(Ord. 03-1998-13, passed 3-10-98; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed 9-27-16; Am. Ord.
07-2021-31, passed 7-13-21)
§ 91.036 CONFINEMENT OF DOGS AND CATS; REMOVAL.
   (A)   Any dog or cat which has bitten a person shall be observed for a
period of ten days from the date of the bite. The procedure and place of
observation shall be designated by the Police Department or animal services
officer. If the dog or cat is not allowed an at-home quarantine, confinement
shall be by impoundment in any city veterinary hospital of the owner’s choice.
Such confinement shall be at the expense of the owner. Stray dogs or cats whose
owners cannot be located shall be confined in a local veterinary hospital or
animal shelter at the discretion of the animal services officer. The owner of
any dog or cat that has been reported to have inflicted a bite on any person
shall on demand produce said dog or cat for impoundment as prescribed in this
section. Refusal to produce the dog or cat constitutes a violation of this
section, and each day of such refusal shall constitute a separate and
individual violation. At no time shall a dog or cat be allowed at-home
quarantine if the animal was in violation of any provisions of this chapter at
the time of the bite.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from any place of
confinement any dog or cat which has been confined as authorized in this
section without consent of the police or animal services officer, until the
designated term of confinement is met.
('68 Code, § 5-3(d),(e)) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47,
passed 9-27-16; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.037 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   (A)   An impounded animal shall be held for a period of three days (not
including the day of impoundment), after which, if the animal has not been
claimed by the owner and the proper fee paid as prescribed herein, the animal
shall be considered abandoned and the owner shall be divested of all ownership
and rights to the animal. The animal shall become the property of the city and
shall be subject to adoption, transfer to another shelter or animal rescue
organization, or humane euthanasia at the city’s sole discretion.
   (B)   If the owner of the impounded animal is known, as soon as practicable
after impoundment, immediate notice shall be given to such owner. Animals with
any type of traceable identification shall be kept for not less than ten days,
or not less than three days from the time the owner is notified, whichever is
the shorter time period. If such animal is not redeemed within three days, and
after reasonable effort has been made to locate its owner, it shall be
considered abandoned and the owner shall be divested of all ownership and right
to the animal. After this time period, the animal shall become the property of
the city and may be placed for adoption subject to payment of the impoundment
fee, care and feeding charges, and such other costs as incurred by the Animal
Services Division for the welfare of the animal, or the animal may be humanely
euthanized or placed under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian.
   (C)   The owner of an impounded animal may reclaim the animal, during normal
hours of operation of the Cleburne Animal Shelter, on the following conditions:
      (1)   Satisfactory proof of ownership of the animal;
      (2)   Photo identification by the person reclaiming the animal;
      (3)   Proof of current vaccination of the animal, if vaccination of the
animal is required by the provisions of this chapter. Non-current animals must
be vaccinated by the owner as a condition of the animal’s release;
      (4)   Payment of all impoundment fees and other costs and expenses
incurred by the city in keeping the animal and attempting to locate the owner
of the animal; and
      (5)   Payment of the costs of fitting and registration of the fitting of
the animal with a microchip under the auspices of the Animal Shelter.
      (6)   If the animal has passed the stray hold period of three days, not
including the day of impound, as set forth in §
91.037(B), all provisions of §
91.041 will apply and the animal will be sterilized prior to release.
   (D)   Due to the potential for contaminating the environment and causing
harm to scavenging animals, the carcass of any animal that has been humanely
euthanized with sodium pentobarbital or any other controlled substance will not
be released to any individual except as provided herein.
      (1)   Burial of animals that have been euthanized with sodium
pentobarbital is prohibited within the corporate city limits of Cleburne.
      (2)   The carcass of an animal which has been euthanized with sodium
pentobarbital may be released to a professional company that provides cremation
services for animals upon approval by the Animal Services Manager.
         (a)   The release of any carcass that has been humanely euthanized
with sodium pentobarbital is at the discretion and authority of the Animal
Services Manager.
         (b)   Approval of the cremation service company is at the discretion
and authority of the Animal Services Manager.
('68 Code, § 5-20) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed
9-27-16; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21)
§ 91.038 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS BEING HELD ON COMPLAINT.
   If a complaint has been filed in city court against the owner of an
impounded animal for violation of this chapter, the animal shall not be
released except on the order of the court, which may also direct the owner to
pay any penalties for violation of this order in addition to all impoundment
fees. The court may, upon making a finding that such animal is dangerous or
that it represents a clear and present danger or nuisance to the citizens or
other animals in the community, order said animal to be euthanized in a humane
manner. Surrender of an animal by the owner thereof to the Animal Services
Division does not relieve or render the owner immune from the decision of the
court, nor to the fees and fines which may result from a violation or
violations of this chapter.
('68 Code, § 5-21) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed
9-27-16; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21)
§ 91.039 DISPOSITION OF DISEASED ANIMALS.
   Any animal taken into custody and held at the impounding facility by the
animal services officer, except animals which have inflicted human bites during
the preceding ten days, that are visibly affected with any sign of communicable
disease other than rabies may, instead of being impounded, be humanely
destroyed, provided that:
   (A)   Any animal which has inflicted any human bite during the preceding ten
days have its head removed and submitted to the laboratory for rabies
examination.
   (B)   Any animal exhibiting symptoms of rabies must be handled in a manner
prescribed by the local health authority.
('68 Code, § 5-22) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed
9-27-16; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21)
§ 91.040 REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS FROM ANIMAL SHELTER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any impounded animal from an
Animal Shelter without the consent of the animal services officer.
('68 Code, § 5-18) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed
9-27-16; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.041 ADOPTIONS.
   (A)   An individual may adopt a dog or cat from the Animal Shelter under the
following conditions:
      (1)   The animal has been classified as adoptable by the Animal Services
Division;
      (2)   The prospective adopter has proper facilities to care for the
animal;
      (3)   The prospective adopter obtains the necessary vaccinations;
      (4)   The prospective adopter pays the applicable fees; and
      (5)   The prospective adopter agrees to have the animal neutered if a
male, or spayed if a female, within 30 days after adoption, or else the Animal
Services Division shall have the right of immediate return of the animal to the
animal shelter, provided, that additional time shall be allowed in the case of
dogs or cats less than six months of age.
   (B)   The Animal Services Division may refuse to allow a person to adopt a
cat or dog whom he has reason to believe that:
      (1)   The person adopting would not have proper facilities to contain or
care for the animal as required by this code;
      (2)   The person adopting wants the dog or cat for the purpose of resale
or for purposes of other than pet ownership; or
      (3)   The cat or dog would pose a hazard to humans or other animals.
      (4)   The person has been deemed an irresponsible dog owner under §
91.019.
   (C)   The Animal Services Division shall make the final determination
whether an animal is healthy enough for adoption. However, such a decision by
the Animal Services Division to permit adoptions of a particular animal shall
not constitute a warranty, expressed or implied of the health, certainty of
breed, age, or temperament of the animal.
('68 Code, § 5-36) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed
9-27-16; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 91.065 EXIGENT CIRCUMSTANCES.
   If upon investigation, an animal services officer believes that exigent
circumstances exist and the animal services officer cannot locate the owner on
the premises, the animal control officer may enter the premises where the
animal is located, other than an occupied building, and without a warrant and
in a reasonable manner, impound the animal.
(Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21)
§ 91.066 AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND ANIMALS.
   Animals owned or harbored in violation of this chapter or any other
ordinance of the city or law of the state shall be taken into custody by an
animal services officer or other designated official and impounded. Stray
animals shall be similarly impounded.
('68 Code, § 5-16) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed
9-27-16; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21)
§ 91.067 AUTHORITY TO KILL, IMPOUND OR DESTROY ANIMALS.
   The Animal Services Manager or their designated deputies, or a peace
officer, is authorized to:
   (A)   Kill an animal which poses an imminent danger to a person or property
or a real or apparent necessity exists for destruction of the animal.
   (B)   Impound an animal which is diseased or endangers the health of a
person or another animal.
   (C)   Destroy an impounded animal at the city shelter if the Animal Services
Manager determines that recovery of the animal from injury, disease, or
sickness, is improbable.
   (D)   Destroy any animal suspected of having rabies or evidencing a
disposition to bite, when such animals are found at large, after having made a
reasonable but unsuccessful effort to capture the animal.
   (E)   Destroy after three days of impoundment (not including the day of
impoundment) or on the opinion of a licensed veterinarian, excluding those
animals found with identification.
   (F)   Impound an animal which endangers the health and welfare of itself,
another animal, or person.
('68 Code, § 5-34(b)) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47,
passed 9-27-16; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21)
§ 91.068 INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCING OFFICERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder or
prevent the Police Department or Animal Services Division or their authorized
representatives in the discharge of their duties as herein prescribed, or to
violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
('68 Code, § 5-34(a)) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47,
passed 9-27-16; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.069 TAMPERING WITH TRAPS OR EQUIPMENT OF ANIMAL SERVICES OFFICERS.
   No person shall remove, alter, damage, or otherwise tamper with any
equipment or traps set out by the Animal Services Division.
('68 Code, § 5-28) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47, passed
9-27-16; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.070 FEE SCHEDULES.
   The fee schedule set forth and approved by the City Council is as follows:
   (A)   Impoundment fee (pickup), dog or cat.
      (1)   First offense.
         (a)   Altered   $25
         (b)   Unaltered   $100
      (2)   Second offense.
         (a)   Altered   $50
         (b)   Unaltered   $200
      (3)   Third and subsequent offenses.
         (a)   Altered   $75
         (b)   Unaltered   $300
      (4)   Any impoundment fee may be reduced if the owner agrees to have the
animal rabies vaccinated, microchipped and spayed or neutered by the Animal
Services Division and the owner pays the fees related to that service.
      (5)   Impound fee - Livestock (running at large) - $100
   (B)   Daily maintenance fees (excludes first day of impound)
      (1)   Dogs and cats - $10 per day per animal
      (2)   Livestock - $25 per day per animal
   (C)   Adoption fee - $75 (established by Animal Services Division based in
part based on vaccination, sterilization, and microchip costs).
   (D)   Owner surrender fee - $25
   (E)   Rabies quarantine fees:
      (1)   Quarantine impound fee - $100
         (a)   Fee may be reduced if owner allows the animal to be spayed or
neutered at current spay/neuter fee, once quarantine is complete.
      (2)   Quarantine daily fee (excludes first day of quarantine) - $10 per
day
      (3)   Animals surrendered in lieu of quarantine - $50
   (F)   Animal establishment permit fee - $100
   (G)   Microchip fitting and registration - $15
   (H)   Multi-pet application fee - $5 per pet over the pet limit
   (I)   Dangerous animal - annual registration - $100 ($50 mandatory fee
pursuant to Tex. Health and Safety Code § 822.043 and $50 administration fee)
   (J)   Trap rental deposit (refundable) - $75 per trap
   (K)   The Animal Services Manager may authorize the waiver or reduction of
fees for special events, activities, and certain circumstances in which the
intended result is to reduce the number of animals being housed by the Animal
Services Division.
('68 Code, § 5-35(a)) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 02-2003-07,
passed 2-25-03; Am. Ord. 02-2007-14, passed 2-27-07; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47,
passed 9-27-16; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 07-13-21)
§ 91.071 RECORDS.
   It shall be the duty of the Animal Services Division of the city to maintain
such records as deemed necessary to the enforcement of all provisions of this
chapter and have those records available for display to the City Council, or to
the public at any time during regular business hours.
('68 Code, § 5-35(c)) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47,
passed 9-27-16; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21)
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter for which no other penalty is set forth shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor which shall bear a maximum fine of $500. Provided, however, any
person who violates the provisions of Tex. Health and Safety Code, Title 10,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.
Each day the violation of any section of this chapter continues or each day the
violation of any provision of state law adopted in this chapter continues
constitutes a separate offense.
   (B)   Fines. The municipal court of the city will establish a schedule of
fines for the violation of any provisions of any sections of this chapter. This
schedule of fines will be subject to review by the City Council and will be
subject to such periodic review and revision as deemed necessary for proper
implementation and enforcement of the provisions contained herein. Court costs
may be added to basic fines. Upon conviction of the offense of dog running at
large, a person shall be fined, at a minimum, as follows:
      (1)   First offense      $50
      (2)   Second offense   $100
      (3)   Third offense      $150
   (C)   Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates
any of the provisions of §
91.012 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
fined not to exceed $500 for each offense. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
('68 Code, §§ 5-35(b), 5-37) (Ord. 3-1989-10, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 7-1991-
21, passed 7-25-91; Am. Ord. 01-2005-09, passed 1-25-05; Am. Ord. 09-2016-47,
passed 9-27-16 ; Am. Ord. 07-2021-32, passed 7-13-21 )
CHAPTER 92: CEMETERIES
Section
   
92.01   Purpose
   
92.02   Definitions
   
92.03   Cemetery charges
   
92.04   Cemetery Advisory Board
   
92.05   Management and control of cemeteries
   
92.06   Duties of the Division Director
   
92.07   (Reserved)
   
92.08   Jurisdiction
   
92.09   Conditions for use; enforcement
   
92.10   Discharging firearms
   
92.11   Obey rules and regulations
   
92.12   Protection of rights; disclaimer
   
92.13   Public street; speed limit
   
92.14   Rights of ingress and egress; removal of objects
   
92.15   Plants, decorations and containers
   
92.16   Vandalism
   
92.17   Sale or transfer of property
   
92.18   Structures
   
92.19   Items prohibited
   
92.20   Cemetery closed to public
   
92.21   Actions prohibited
   
92.22   Sanitation
   
92.23   Animals and pets
   
92.24   Merchandising, advertising and signs
   
92.25   Memorial and monument regulations
   
92.26   Memorial and monument foundation requirements
   
92.27   Rules and regulations
   
92.28   Cemetery space requirements and prohibitions
   
92.29   Reservations and corrections
   
92.30   Mausoleums, columbarium, and family lots
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules and regulations for the
cemeteries owned and operated by the city, designed for the protection of
owner's interment rights and to insure the proper development of safety,
maintenance and operation of the cemeteries.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98)
§ 92.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CEMETERY.  A cemetery within the city limits and under the jurisdiction of
the city.
   CITY. The City of Cleburne, Johnson County, Texas.
   COLUMBARIUM. A room, building, or wall typically located wholly above-ground
with places for entombment of the ashes of deceased human beings who have been
cremated. Not for commercial use.
   DISINTERMENT.  The unearthing of the remains of a deceased human being.
   FAMILY LOT. A burial section, located below ground, with a single large
headstone engraved with the family name marking the area, and then each
individual family member who is interred there may have their own small
headstone marking the individual grave; abiding by §
92.25.
   INTERMENT.  The entombment or burial of the remains of a deceased human
being.
   MAUSOLEUM. A burial vault or tomb typically located either partially or
wholly above-ground with places for entombment or burial of the remains of
deceased human beings.
   MEMORIAL.  Any marker, monument, headstone, footstone or other structure
upon on any lot, niche or place thereupon or partially therein for
identification or in memory of the interred.
   OWNER.  The owner of record of a space or lot or the designated
representative or successor in interest.
   SPACE.  The area normally designated for a single or double-stacked
interment.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98; Am. Ord. 11-2023-76, passed 11-14-23)
§ 92.03 CEMETERY CHARGES.
   (A)   The following charges shall be established for all city-owned and
operated cemeteries:
CEMETERY SPACE CHARGES
CEMETERY SPACE CHARGES
Street frontage spaces                    $1,000.00
Interior spaces                            950.00
Infant spaces                              250.00
Cremains spaces                            250.00
Interment fee                              250.00
Annual contractor permit fee               25.00
MAUSOLEUM, COLUMBARIUM, AND FAMILY LOT CHARGES
                                       $10,000 if purchased prior to December
Mausoleum, columbarium, and family lot 31, 2024; $25,000 if purchased on or
                                       after January 1, 2025
MEMORIAL/MONUMENT PERMIT FEES
Upright monuments                         $40.00
Upright monuments greater than 36" in      80.00
height                                     30.00
Ground flush markers
MEMORIAL INSTALLATION
Government issue grave markers:         
Small                                     $100.00
Large                                      125.00
Columbarium - niche fee                    800.00
 
   (B)   All cemetery fees including grave space cost and interment fees must
be paid in full before an interment can be approved by the city.
   (C)   Pauper interments requests must be accompanied by a Judges Order of
Burial. The city reserves the right to select and designate an area of a
cemetery to be used for pauper burials. Additionally, the city reserves the
right to select the space for burial in the pauper burial area. Any grave
markers must be approved in advance of placement within this area. There will
be no pauper burials Saturday, Sunday or holidays, or Monday through Friday
after 3:00 p.m.
   (D)   Cemetery space payout agreement.
      (1)   Persons desiring to purchase grave spaces on an installment plan
shall apply to the Cemetery Clerk and complete the appropriate application.
      (2)   Payout agreement shall have a term not to exceed 24 months.
      (3)   The calculated monthly charge is due on the first day of the month
and shall be delinquent if not paid on or before the tenth day of the month
due.
      (4)   A 10% late fee will be applied to payments made after the tenth day
of the month due.
      (5)   A 6% interest fee will be applied to space price and will be
included as a part of the monthly charge.
      (6)   A down payment of $100 will be required at signing.
      (7)   Title to space shall be transferred to purchaser upon full payment
due on space.
      (8)   Accounts delinquent for 90 or more days will be considered
forfeited and returned to a saleable status. Payments made on these delinquent
accounts, prior to delinquency, will not be refunded.
   (E)   Mausoleum, columbarium, and family lot installment plan agreement.
      (1)   Persons desiring to purchase a cemetery estate that will include a
mausoleum, columbarium, or family lot on an installment plan shall apply at the
cemetery office and complete the appropriate application.
      (2)   Any payout or installment agreement shall have a term not to exceed
24 months.
      (3)   The calculated monthly charge is due on the first day of the month
and shall be delinquent if not paid on or before the tenth day of the month
due.
      (4)   A 10% late fee will be applied to payments made after the tenth day
of the month due.
      (5)   A 6% interest fee will be applied to the estate price and will be
included as a part of the monthly charge.
      (6)   Ten percent of the total cost is required as a down payment at
signing.
      (7)   Title to space shall be transferred to the purchaser upon full
payment due on space.
      (8)   Accounts delinquent for 90 or more days will be considered
forfeited and returned to a saleable status. Payments made on these delinquent
accounts, prior to delinquency, will not be refunded.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98; Am. Ord. 6-2002-37, passed 6-11- 02; Am.
Ord. 6-2002-50, passed 7-23-02; Am. Ord. 10-2005-64, passed 10-11-05; Am. Ord.
06-2006-52, passed 6-27-06; Am. Ord. 11-2006-89, passed 11-28-06; Am. Ord. 09-
2011-53, passed 9-27-11; Am. Ord. 09- 2013-58, passed 9-24-13; Am. Ord. 11-
2013-80, passed 11-12-13; Am. Ord. 11-2023-76, passed 11-14-23; Am. Ord. 06-
2024-42, passed 6-11- 24)
§ 92.04 CEMETERY ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   Created; composition; appointment of members.
      (1)   There is created a Cemetery Advisory Board for the city. The Board
shall be composed of five members to include one City Council member, one
funeral home director, and three Cleburne residents who shall be appointed by
the City Council and who serve without compensation.
      (2)   The City Manager shall serve as an ex officio member of the
Cemetery Advisory Board.
   (B)   Terms of members. Members of the Cemetery Advisory Board shall serve
for a term of two years and until their successors have been appointed.
   (C)   Election of officers; rules of procedure. The Cemetery Advisory Board
shall make its own rules for election of officers and the conduct of its
business.
   (D)   Duties. It shall be the duty of the Cemetery Advisory Board to make
plans for future developments and welfare of the city in regard to the
cemeteries, to confer with and make recommendations to the City Manager
relating to such plans, to conduct programs of education for the effective
carrying out of such plans, and to assist the City Manager and the City Council
in development and adoption of such plans and recommendations in advisory in
nature, in every way possible.
   (E)   No authority to expend city funds or to order work done. The Cemetery
Advisory Board shall have no authority to make expenditure of city funds, nor
to order any work done on its own authority. The Cemetery Advisory Board shall
have no authority to employ or discharge employees of the Cemetery Department
nor to make duty assignments to the employees of the cemetery.
(Ord. 10-2015-71, passed 10-13-15)
Cross-reference:
   Boards, commissions and public bodies generally, see
Ch. 31
§ 92.05 MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL OF CEMETERIES.
   All city-owned and operated cemeteries and all the facilities and equipment
located therein shall be under the management and control of the City Manager
or his or her appointee.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98; Am. Ord. 09-2013-58, passed 9-24-13)
§ 92.06 DUTIES OF THE DIVISION DIRECTOR.
   Subject to approval of the City Manager, the Community Services Division
Director shall be responsible for determining overall policies, regulations and
programs governing acquisition, improvement, maintenance and operation of all
city cemeteries owned or controlled by the city. The Community Services
Division Director shall be responsible to the City Manager for administration
and implementation of the policies established by the City Council in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98)
§ 92.07 (RESERVED).
§ 92.08 JURISDICTION.
   The rules and regulations in this chapter shall be in full force and effect
in all cemeteries owned or controlled by the city unless specifically exempted
by this chapter.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98)
§ 92.09 CONDITIONS FOR USE; ENFORCEMENT.
   Compliance with rules and regulations of this chapter is a condition of the
use of the cemeteries of the city. All police officers shall have the right and
power to arrest any person who may violate any of the rules, regulations,
orders or requirements of the cemetery ordinance or general law relating to the
maintenance or operation of the cemeteries.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98; Am. Ord. 09-2013-58, passed 9-24-13)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.10 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol, air gun or
firearm of any kind within or across any cemetery. Exemption is given to peace
officers, city animal control officers and a military guard of honor when in
charge of by an officer and during a military service.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.11 OBEY RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The city reserves the right to require all persons entering a cemetery to
obey all rules and regulations regarding that cemetery. The rules and
regulations may be changed without notice to any space owner by the City
Council.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98)
§ 92.12 PROTECTION OF RIGHTS; DISCLAIMER.
   The city shall take reasonable precautions to protect owners and the
property rights of the owners within the cemeteries from loss or damage; but it
distinctly disclaims all responsibility for loss or damage caused by the
elements, an act of God, common enemy, thieves, vandals, unavoidable accidents,
whether the damage be direct or collateral, other than herein provided.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98)
§ 92.13 PUBLIC STREET; SPEED LIMIT.
   (A)   Automobiles, trucks and other vehicles shall not be driven through the
cemetery grounds at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour and must, at all
times, be kept on paved or gravel streets. Exemption shall be made for city-
owned vehicles conducting maintenance and monument companies setting grave
markers.
   (B)   No person shall be permitted to enter or leave cemetery grounds by
vehicle except by established entrances and exits. All applicable state and
local vehicle traffic laws and ordinances shall continue in full force and
effect in all cemeteries.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98)
§ 92.14 RIGHTS OF INGRESS AND EGRESS; REMOVAL OF OBJECTS.
   (A)   The city reserves the right to enlarge, reduce, replat or change the
boundaries or grading of the cemeteries as it deems appropriate. The city also
reserves unto itself, and those lawfully entitled thereto, a perpetual right of
ingress and egress over, around and through lots for the purpose of passage to
and from other lots, and to accomplish all necessary maintenance and
preservation of said lots.
   (B)   The city reserves the right to enter upon any space or lot and remove
any objectionable thing that may have been placed there contrary to the rules
and regulations of the cemeteries.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98)
§ 92.15 PLANTS, DECORATIONS AND CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Intent. 
      (1)   This section is not made to interfere with the lot owner's rights;
it is imposed to protect the interest of all lot owners and to promote general
harmony and uniformity to the benefit of all.
      (2)   Unsightly objects, erected or placed upon lots, out of harmony with
the general landscape design as adopted by the city will not be permitted.
Whenever objects of such nature are placed on lots or graves, the city reserves
the right to remove them without notice.
   (B)   Decoration. All graves are limited to two items of floral decoration
and one monument saddle floral design piece. These are limited to plants only,
either live potted, artificial or cut flower arrangements.
   (C)   Mowing season defined. The mowing season is defined as that time
period from March 1st through November 1st of each year, unless the weather is
out of season and mowing will need to continue through the winter months.
   (D)   Seasonal and holiday decorations.
      (1)   Potted plants, flowers, baskets and cemetery logs are allowed on
any given holiday or on a day that signifies a special occasion, i.e. an
anniversary or birthday.
      (2)   Wreaths or sprays of evergreens will be allowed during the
Christmas season.
      (3)   No live, cut or artificial Christmas trees are allowed.
      (4)   Flags may be placed on graves for Memorial Day, 4th of July, or
Veterans Day observances.
      (5)   All decorations will be removed starting ten days after a holiday
or special occasion without notice and may be subject to removal if they become
unsightly before ten days are expired.
      (6)   The placing of personal articles, toys, metal or wood designs,
ornaments, furniture, or any other article of any kind is strictly prohibited.
      (7)   Small benches are allowed so as to not create difficulty in mowing
graves. The bench must be placed on a cement pad that extends six inches in all
directions beyond the edge of the bench and in a location to be determined by
the Community Services Division Director or designee.
   (E)   Definition of approved plants.
      (1)   Approved floral arrangements are potted live plants, cut flowers or
artificial flowers, and must be placed in the monument attached vases/urn or on
the saddle arrangement on top of monument.
      (2)   Saddle floral arrangements.
         (a)   Saddles may be used on top of monuments year round.
         (b)   Only one saddle is permitted on any one monument.
         (c)   Saddles are not to be anchored to the ground in any manner and
also may not be mounted on foot markers.
         (d)   Saddles will be removed after they have deteriorated, faded,
and/or become unsightly.
   (F)   Placement of floral decorations.
      (1)   Floral decorations are not allowed to be displayed on graves during
the mowing season unless these are displayed in urns attached to the monument
(i.e. colonnade monuments) or in a saddle arrangement.
      (2)   During the non-mowing season, plants must be placed adjacent to the
monument base and not anchored to the ground with wire, rocks or stakes.
      (3)   Plants cannot be placed in the ground. No digging is allowed.
      (4)   If no monument is present, then plants shall be placed at the head
of the grave until the required monument is installed.
   (G)   Colonnade monuments.
      (1)   Colonnade monuments have urns/vases incorporated into their design
which are intended for the placement of flowers.
      (2)   Flowers are to be displayed in the urns/vases only or one saddle.
   (H)   Approved floral containers. Plastic pots or vases are approved. Glass
or clay containers are not permitted.
   (I)   Horticultural product planting.
      (1)   The planting of any type of horticultural product is prohibited.
      (2)   If any tree or shrub situated on any space shall become
detrimental, unsightly, impede access to adjacent spaces, walks, roads, or the
routine grave maintenance, the city reserves the right to prune or remove in
whole or in part as may be determined by the Community Services Division
Director or designee without notice.
      (3)   Any tree or shrub which, in the opinion of the Community Services
Division Director or designee, becomes or may become detrimental to a monument
may be pruned or removed in whole or in part without notice.
   (J)   Space landscape.
      (1)   No person shall alter the surface of any grave space causing the
surface of the ground to be raised, lowered or otherwise altered from the
existing height of the surrounding area.
      (2)   Any work, including but not limited to grading, landscaping,
improvements or alterations of individual spaces in the cemeteries shall be
done by maintenance personnel only under the direction of the Community
Services Division Director or designee.
      (3)   All trees, shrubs and herbage of any kind shall be planted,
trimmed, cut or removed by maintenance personnel only under the direction of
the Community Services Division Director or designee without notice.
   (K)   Removal of unsightly decorations.
      (1)   The city shall have the authority and reserves the right to remove
any floral designs, flowers, weeds, trees, shrubs, plants, or any item or thing
of any kind as soon as, in the judgment of the Community Services Division
Director or designee, they become unsightly, dangerous, detrimental, diseased
or in violation of city ordinances without notice.
      (2)   The city shall not be liable for any floral pieces or frames in
which or to which such floral pieces are attached beyond the acceptance of such
floral pieces for funeral services held in the cemeteries. The city shall not
be liable for lost, misplaced, or broken flower bases, or for plantings damaged
by the elements, thieves, vandals or by other causes beyond its control.
      (3)   The city shall not be liable for any item placed on a grave in
violation of this section. Such items will be removed and disposed of without
notice.
      (4)   Flowers left on the grave after a funeral service will be removed
after seven days of the date of the funeral service or sooner if appearance
requires removal.
   (L)   Space border, curbing or enclosure.
      (1)   When approved by the Community Services Division Director or
designee, only curbing of concrete with approved reinforcing material shall be
used to outline the entire space being four inches in width, extending to a
depth of six inches below grade and being top flush with the existing grade.
      (2)   No enclosures of any kind/material, except as described in division
(L)(1) above, are allowed, including fences, ditches, stones, pavers, bricks,
boxes, wood, urns or granite enclosures.
      (3)   Any continuous concrete space curbing or border already in place at
the time of adoption of this section shall remain.
      (4)   Antique fencing already in place in Cleburne Memorial Cemetery may
remain in place.
   (M)   Space coverings.
      (1)   No lot or grave shall be covered in whole or in part by sand,
gravel, rock, broken stone, cinders or other substance which may prevent the
free growth of grass.
      (2)   No concrete slabs allowed. Those already in existence shall remain.
      (3)   Grave blankets are not allowed except at Christmas and will be
removed ten days following the holiday.
   (N)   Prohibited items.
      (1)   No statues or crosses, other than statuary or crosses already
carved into the design and construction of a monument, will be allowed.
      (2)   Novelty and decorative items such as toys, balloons, wind vanes and
chimes, knickknacks, crockery, glassware, beverage containers, or yard art
designs are prohibited.
      (3)   Decorative articles which are deemed hazardous to cemetery
employees or equipment will be removed without notice.
      (4)   No lights are allowed whatsoever, including but not limited to:
open flame candles, torches, vigil lights, eternal lights, solar lights,
strings of lights, any type of light that is operated with a battery or battery
pack. These items are also not allowed to be in effect while a visitor may be
at a gravesite.
      (5)   Decorating or hanging of any objects in cemetery trees is
prohibited.
      (6)   Wire is not permitted for use in the cemeteries.
      (7)   Wire easels are permitted for floral decoration during a funeral
service or for holiday arrangements. These will be removed after ten days
following the service or holiday without notice.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98; Am. Ord. 08-2006-64, passed 8-6- 06; Am.
Ord. 09-2013-58, passed 9-24-13)
§ 92.16 VANDALISM.
   It shall be unlawful to vandalize any cemetery property, memorials or graves
and anyone apprehended doing so shall be subject to prosecution.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.17 SALE OR TRANSFER OF PROPERTY.
   The sale or transfer of any interment right by any space owner shall not be
binding unless approved in writing by the city prior to such sale or transfer.
This procedure is required in order that the city may, at all times, have a
complete and accurate record of all owners of spaces. The legal recording of
the sale or transfer of a space shall be the owner's responsibility and at
their expense.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98)
§ 92.18 STRUCTURES.
   No structure of any kind, including but not limited to curbing, fencing,
benches, flagpoles, etc., shall be permitted upon any space or lot. Approved
monuments are exempted.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.19 ITEMS PROHIBITED.
   No glass containers of any type are allowed in any cemetery. The buying,
selling, possessing or use of intoxicating beverages in any cemetery is
prohibited.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.20 CEMETERY CLOSED TO PUBLIC.
   All cemeteries are closed to the public from sundown to sunup. The city
reserves the right to close any cemetery or portion thereof on a temporary
basis at any time without prior notice to space owners.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98)
§ 92.21 ACTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall in any cemetery do or cause to be done any of the
following without first obtaining permission from the city:
      (1)   Capture, attempt to capture, hunt, molest, injure, trap, or
administer or set out any trap or harmful substance for any wild or domestic
animal, reptile, bird, or fish, nor remove or have in his possession the young,
eggs, or nest of any animal, reptile or bird, except as set out in subsections
(2) and (3) below.
      (2)   Any person may kill on sight a reptile known to be deadly or
poisonous.
      (3)   City animal warden, cemetery personnel or peace officer may capture
animals at large within their official scope of duties.
      (4)   Maintenance personnel may dispense pesticides for the control of
insects in accordance with state law.
   (B)   All persons are forbidden to hunt, to fish or to feed or disturb the
fish, fowl or other animals about the cemeteries.
   (C)   No money shall be paid by a public individual to any maintenance
employee for any service he or she may render to the public individual. The
entire time of persons regularly employed by the city belongs to the city.
Visitors and space owners shall refrain from engaging them to do work on spaces
or lots. All orders, inquiries or complaints shall be left at the cemetery
office or with the Community Services Manager’s office.
   (D)   No cross-curbing of lots or covering lots with concrete or any other
ornamental material shall be permitted.
   (E)   Due to the city's obligation to maintain the cemetery lawns throughout
the grass-growing season, digging holes in the ground or placing of rods or
brackets to support top heavy pots and containers at places of interment is not
permitted. Such items create a danger of bodily injury to maintenance personnel
and any other person present, and can cause possible damage to maintenance
equipment while maintenance is being performed.
   (F)   No person shall, in any cemetery, do or cause to be done any of the
following without first obtaining permission from the Community Services
Division Director or designee:
      (1)   Mark, deface, injure, displace, remove, or tamper with any cemetery
property, structures or any grounds.
      (2)   Construct or erect any building or structure of any kind, whether
permanent or temporary.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98; Am. Ord. 09-2013-58, passed 9-24-13; Am.
Ord. 11-2013-80, passed 11-12-13) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.22 SANITATION.
   No person shall in any cemetery area:
   (A)   Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in or
adjacent to any cemetery, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid,
which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
   (B)   Dump, deposit or leave any bottles, glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans,
dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage refuse or other debris upon cemetery grounds.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.23 ANIMALS AND PETS.
   No person shall in any cemetery:
   (A)   Ride a horse or other animal. This prohibition shall not apply to a
duly authorized mounted police officer in the performance of his official
duties.
   (B)   Permit any dog owned or possessed by him/her to run at large, nor
permit any such dog in a cemetery unless it shall, at all times, be restricted
or kept on a leash. This prohibition shall not apply to a police service dogs
(K-9 units) while under the supervision of a duly authorized police officer in
the performance of official duties.
   (C)   Abandon any animal in any cemetery area.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.24 MERCHANDISING, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS.
   (A)   Expose or offer for sale or hire any article, thing or service, nor
station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or
display of any article, thing or service unless permission has been obtained
from the Community Services Division Director or designee.
   (B)   Announce, advertise or call the public's attention in any way to any
article, thing or service for sale or hire unless done pursuant to permission
obtained from the Community Services Division Director or designee.
   (C)   Paste, glue, tack, or otherwise place any sign, placard, advertisement
or inscription on any cemetery property or erect, or cause to be erected, any
sign on any city owned or controlled property in or adjacent to any cemetery
unless done pursuant to permission obtained from the Community Services
Division Director or designee.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98; Am. Ord. 09-2013-58, passed 9-24-13)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.25 MEMORIAL AND MONUMENT REGULATIONS.
   Regulations for the installation and maintenance of memorials and monuments
are as follows:
   (A)   Memorial and monument dealers shall abide by all rules and regulations
of the cemeteries as set forth by the City Council.
   (B)   For the protection of all space owners, any person erecting or
repairing memorials or monuments must first obtain a permit to do same. The
cost of the permit is set out in the cemetery charge schedule of this chapter.
The fee is established to cover the cost of layout and inspection of memorials
or monuments. The person obtaining the permit shall be responsible for any
damage incurred while conducting memorial or monument work in any cemetery.
   (C)   The city reserves the right to approve the size, craftsmanship,
quality and foundation design of memorials or monuments prior to the placement
or erection.
   (D)   Memorial or monument dealers engaged in placing or erecting memorials
or other structures are prohibited from scattering their construction materials
and supplies over adjoining spaces; or from blocking roads or walks; or from
leaving their materials and supplies on the ground longer than necessary.
Damage done to spaces, walks, drives, trees, shrubs, or any other city property
shall be repaired or replaced at their expense to the satisfaction the city.
   (E)   Work of any nature may be stopped if proper preparations have not been
made; or when work is being done in such a manner as to endanger life or
property; or when there is evidence of misrepresentation; or when work is not
being executed according to specifications when a request on the part of the
city is disregarded; or when any person employed in the work violates any rule
or regulation of the cemetery.
   (F)   All interments shall have a memorial or monument reflecting, at a
minimum, the full name of the deceased and the date of death. The monument or
memorial must be installed within 12 months of the time of interment.
   (G)   All memorials or monuments shall be installed and maintained at the
owner's expense.
   (H)   The size of the memorial or monument is to be governed according to
the ratio of the area of the base of the memorial or monument to the size of
the space. The length of the base shall not exceed 75% of the width of the
space.
   (I)   Memorials or monuments shall be made of granite, marble or cast bronze
installed on granite, marble or concrete base. All monuments installed above
the level surface of the ground must be placed on a cement pad that extends six
inches beyond all sides of the monument or base.
   (J)   Flush-type and above ground memorials and monuments are allowed in
different sections of the city cemeteries as follows:
      (1)   Rosehill Memorial Park. Only one upright monument shall be
permitted on any family plot. All individual grave or foot markers shall be
flush with the ground level. Exception is Section A whereby all grave markers
and foot markers shall be flush with the ground level.
      (2)   Memorial Cemetery. Only one upright monument shall be permitted on
any family plot. All individual grave or foot markers shall be flush with the
ground level.
      (3)   Greenlawn Cemetery. Same restrictions as Section A, Rosehill
Memorial Park.
      (4)   Chambers Cemetery. Upright markers or flat markers are allowable
with no visible foundation unless ordered by space owner.
   (K)   Funeral home will add $130 to the funeral cost to accommodate a
minimum marker installation, in the event the space owner fails to install a
marker within the required time frame. The space owner will receive a refund
from the city once they install a marker before the deadline.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98; Am. Ord. 09-2013-58, passed 9-24-13)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.26 MEMORIAL AND MONUMENT FOUNDATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The following are rules and regulations concerning memorial or monument
foundation requirements:
   (A)   A permit fee shall be paid and a permit shall be obtained by all
individuals constructing, erecting or installing memorial or monument
foundations within the city's cemeteries. Inspection of the foundation site
shall be requested by the individual or firm prior to pouring the concrete.
Final approval of foundation will be made upon completion of the project.
   (B)   The concrete to be used for the memorial or monument foundation shall
have a minimum compression strength of 3,000 pounds per square inch.
   (C)   Excluding Section A in Rosehill Cemetery, in all other sections and
any future sections developed the memorial or monument foundation shall be six
inches longer and wider in all directions than that of the memorial or monument
to be installed on said foundation and having a minimum depth of four inches.
If a monument stands more than two feet in height, then one 6" x 12" round pier
must be installed in the middle which is continuously poured with the
foundation.
   (D)   Visible foundations will not be required in Section A and any future
flat marker sections developed, but shall have a concrete foundation pad
directly underneath the marker to prevent sinking of the marker.
   (E)   All memorial or monument foundations shall have 10/10 or #3 1/4"
reinforcement rod the length of the foundation every six inches of foundation
width within the concrete.
   (F)   Monument companies shall be responsible for the fabrication and
installation of all foundation required.
   (G)   Monuments in sections except Section A will be set as near the center
of the lot as possible.
   (H)   Only upright monuments are allowed in Sections D and E. Lots facing
the street side in these sections shall have the monument facing the street and
located at the end of the lot closest to the street. Lots behind those lots on
the street side shall have the monument placed at the opposite end of the lot.
   (I)   All monuments are to be jointed with Set Rite or material of similar
quality.
   (J)   City reserves the right to refuse permission to allow a marker or
monument to be placed on a lot until said lot is paid for in full.
   (K)   Granite or marble raised lettering shall not be permitted other than
those already existing.
   (L)   Pictures in grass level markers shall not be permitted other than
those already existing.
   (M)   There shall be a minimum of four inches of concrete base for each
marker.
(Only grass level markers made of granite, marble or bronze shall be
permitted.)
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.27 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The following are rules and regulations for the interments, disinterments
and reinterments within all cemeteries:
   (A)   Written authorization from the owner of record of a space or his
designated representative, successor in interest or other proper legal
authority will be required before an interment or reinterment is allowed. In
certain cases, the city may require grave sites to be physically located by the
family or its representatives and authorization signed by the space owner or
legal representative of the space owner prior to opening the space for
interment, disinterment or reinterment. This gives the city the right to open
the grave space selected by the family.
   (B)   Proper authorization as required by the State of Texas or any public
authority having jurisdiction in the matter must be presented to the city at
the time an interment, disinterment or reinterment is effected. The city shall
not be liable for the accuracy of the data contained in said authorization or
for the identity of the person to be interred or disinterred.
   (C)   All interments, disinterments and reinterments shall be performed by a
licensed funeral director, the city employees or its contractors or other
persons as provided by state and local laws. In the event that a funeral home
or its contractor is in arrears for charges owed to the city for cemetery
services performed by the city or cemetery related fees and permits required of
the funeral home or its contractors, and these said charges remain unpaid for a
period of 30 days from the date services were rendered or fees or permits were
required, the city may prohibit the opening and closing of any other grave site
requested by such funeral home or its contractors until such time as the debt
is paid in full.
   (D)   Interment of human remains is allowed only in areas dedicated for
grave sites.
   (F)   The scattering of human cremation remains in any city owned cemetery
is not allowed.
   (G)   Contractor guidelines for work performed in cemeteries.
      (1)   Contractors shall contact cemetery clerk to locate interment
spaces, and the clerk will contact a staff representative to assist if
interment location is in question or not found.
      (2)   Cemetery clerk will take digital pictures of the interment area to
record any pre-existing damages prior to the contractor beginning gravesite
opening procedures. Additionally, the cemetery clerk will inspect the interment
area after closing operations to record any damage that may have been caused by
the contractor.
      (3)   In the event of inclement weather, the cemetery clerk at their
discretion may call in a staff representative to look at the site and recommend
an alternate digging procedure.
      (4)   Contractors shall place 3/4 inch sheets of plywood under the front
bucket and the outrigger arms of the backhoe during the excavation process to
reduce damage to cemetery grounds near the interment area.
      (5)   If the interment is not on the same day as gravesite opening
operations, the contractor must cover the open grave with three 3/4 inch sheets
of plywood and cover with a six-foot by eight-foot tarp to protect visitors of
the cemetery.
      (6)   During wet conditions, the contractor shall use plywood for
equipment to drive on so as not to create damage to streets or cause ruts.
      (7)   If ruts are created, the contractor shall repair the area as soon
as possible. If the repairs are not made within ten business days, the city
will make the repairs and bill the contractor for the cost of repairs. Failure
to repair damages may lead to the contractor being removed from the city’s
approved contractor list.
      (8)   Monuments that may hinder the digging operation will need to be
moved by the contractor by rolling the monument onto plywood to accommodate the
backhoe and dump truck. Two two-inch by six-inch boards should be laid on both
sides of the monument’s concrete slab, with two 3/4 inch sheets of plywood on
top to protect the slab. After digging has been completed, the monument shall
be rolled back into place until the service is over. The monument may need to
be rolled again to accommodate a burial vault if the funeral is not on the same
day that the gravesite is opened. After the closing duties are performed, the
monument will be placed in the original location and the contractor shall reset
it using a setting compound.
      (9)   If the contractor decides they do not need to roll the monument,
then the contractor shall use three 3/4 inch sheets of plywood placed under the
backhoe outrigger arms to increase the digging height advantage on monuments
three feet or more in height. Two 3/4 inch sheets of plywood shall be placed
under the backhoe outrigger arms to increase the digging height advantage on
monuments two feet or less in height.
      (10)   The contractor shall cover each monument in close proximity to the
interment site with a six-foot by eight-foot tarp to avoid hydraulic spill
damage during opening and closing procedures.
      (11)   Contractor shall maintain general liability insurance coverage of
at least $1,000,000 and automotive liability insurance of at least $1,000,000
with the city listed as an additional insured.
      (12)   All contractors shall be required to sign an acknowledgement that
they will abide by these rules and regulations, and obtain a contractor’s
registration permit. Permits are available at the cemetery office.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98; Am. Ord. 09-2013-58, passed 9-24-13; Am.
Ord. 11-2013-80, passed 11-12-13) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.28 CEMETERY SPACE REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Mausoleums, columbariums, and family lots, either partially or
entirely above ground, are prohibited except as provided for in §
92.30. Lots for mausoleums, columbariums, and family lots will be 25 feet by 25
feet.
   (B)   A permanent type container such as a concrete liner or burial vault is
required for all interments where the casket is 36 inches in length or larger.
   (C)   A maximum of two caskets may be allowed in any one space in areas
designated for double-stacked interments. In the event that cremation is
utilized, a maximum of four interments will be permitted in one burial space.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98; Am. Ord. 11-2023-76, passed 11-14-23)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.29 RESERVATIONS AND CORRECTIONS.
   (A)   The city reserves the right to correct errors associated with
interments of conveyance of property. In the event such error shall involve
interment, the city reserves the right to remove and reenter the remains to
such property of equal value and similar location as may be substituted and
conveyed in lieu thereof. Should an error develop in the conveyance of
property, the city may correct such error by conveying property of equal value
in similar location insofar as possible.
   (B)   The right to revise and/or add to the cemeteries a section or sections
from time to time, including the right to modify or change the location of or
any part thereof or to remove or regrade roads, drives and walkways is
expressly reserved. The right to lay, maintain and operate, or to alter or
change pipelines or gutters for water sprinkler systems and drainage is
expressly reserved, as the right to use cemetery property, not sold to
individual owners for cemetery purposes, including the interring and the
preparation of anything necessary, incidental or convenient thereto. The
cemetery reserves to itself and to those lawfully entitled thereto, a perpetual
right of ingress and egress over spaces for the purpose of passage to and from
other spaces.
   (C)   No easement is granted to any owner in any road, drive or walkway
within the cemeteries, but such road, drive or walkway may be used as a means
of access to the cemeteries and its buildings as long as the city devotes such
roads, drives and walkways to that purpose.
   (D)   The city disclaims responsibility to space owners, their personal
representatives or successor in interest for loss or damage to cemetery spaces,
memorials or monuments by any cause, natural or otherwise, direct or indirect
beyond reasonable control of the city.
   (E)   The statement of any employee of the city or its contractors shall not
be binding upon the city except as such statement agrees with the document
conveying the right of interment and these rules and regulations.
   (F)   The city reserves the right at any time and from time to time to
change, amend, alter, repeal, or add to these rules and regulations or any part
thereof or to adopt any new rule or regulation or any temporary exception with
respect to said cemeteries or anything pertaining thereto, without prior
notification.
   (G)   In all matters not specifically addressed by these rules and
regulations, the city reserves the right to do anything which, in its judgement
is deemed reasonable pertaining to the cemeteries, and such determination shall
be binding upon the space owner and all parties concerned.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98)
§ 92.30 MAUSOLEUMS, COLUMBARIUM, AND FAMILY LOTS.
   (A)   Construction materials.
      (1)   The construction and exterior surface of the mausoleum,
columbarium, or family lot shall consist only of granite, with trim and
hardware consisting of marble, hewn stone, glass, or rustproof metal such as
bronze or steel in a natural, earth tone, or neutral-color shade. The total
surface area of the exterior of a mausoleum shall consist of at least 90%
granite surface, which shall include any portion of the exterior of the
mausoleum that extends above grade level.
      (2)   The use of metals listed in division (A)(1) above is approved for
doors and window grills of the mausoleums and other mausoleum fixtures and
statuary, provided it has been produced or cast by a dealer approved by the
Cemetery Advisory Board.
         (a)   Mixed metals shall not be used unless they are of substantially
similar appearance and will achieve a similar patina upon weathering.
         (b)   Suppliers shall be required to certify as to the analysis of the
metal used.
         (c)   No metals or other than those listed in division (A)(1) above
are approved unless they are approved by the Cemetery Advisory Board as being
substantially noncorrosive and of proven permanence.
      (3)   Bright or fluorescent colors are not allowed on the exterior of a
mausoleum, columbarium, or family lot, or employ the use of applied materials
on any visible surface except for caulk or other weather sealant necessary to
preserve the exterior and prevent decay and water intrusion.
      (4)   Windows and other transparent openings installed shall be made of
polycarbonate sheets, tempered glass, or other shatterproof glass.
   (B)   Required construction documents.
      (1)   Building and associated permits shall be required as determined by
the Community Development Department.
      (2)   The officer may request documentation that the finished grade of
the plot will evacuate water from the furnished plot to the nearest access road
or swale designed for the purpose of collecting or evacuating water. Stormwater
shall not be allowed to pool or sheet flow to a neighboring plot or
unauthorized area.
      (3)   Mausoleums, columbariums, or family lots shall be constructed to
the manufacturer’s specifications or in accordance with approved engineered
plans.
      (4)   Construction on the sites will be done at the owner of the lot’s
own risk.
      (5)   The owner of the lot must agree to indemnify the city for any
injuries that occur due to the negligence of the owner and their contractors or
subcontractors, both during and after the construction of any mausoleums,
columbariums, or family lots.
   (C)   Design of mausoleums, columbariums, or family lots.
      (1)   The maximum height shall be 15 feet to the highest point of the
structure and any object carved into the design and construction of the
mausoleum, columbarium, or family lot including any spires and statuary, as
measured from the average grade at the foundation of the structure.
      (2)   Roof style is limited to a flat roof, domed roof, or peaked roof
with no more than two intersecting ridgelines or one ridgeline situated
equidistant from and parallel to the sides of the structure. An alternative
style of roof may be considered and approved by the Cemetery Advisory Board on
a case-by-case basis.
      (3)   Columns utilized on the front or sides of the structure may be
decorative or load bearing, but shall not exceed the height of the roof or the
width of the structural foundation.
      (4)   Seating areas outside the structure shall be constructed of
granite, marble, or cast bronze and must be within the space purchased. Seats
shall be styled as benches.
      (5)   No structure of any kind, including but not limited to curbing,
fencing, flagpoles, etc., shall be permitted upon any lot.
      (6)   Plantings will not be permitted on cemetery grounds.
   (D)   Location of mausoleums, columbariums, or family lots. Mausoleums,
columbariums, or family lots may only be located in Rose Hill Section P.
(Ord. 11-2023-76, passed 11-14-23)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined not to exceed $2,000 for each offense. Each
day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 11-1998-86, passed 11-24-98)
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PROTECTION
AND PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Fire Department established
   
93.02   Office of Fire Chief
   
93.03   Authority of the Fire Department
   
93.04   Obstructing Fire Department operations and use of Fire Department
property for certain activity
   
93.05   False alarms
   
93.06   Fire Department organization
   
93.07   Executive Assistant Chief
   
93.08   Emergency services division
   
93.09   Work periods established
   
93.10   Hazardous materials response charges
Fire Prevention
   
93.11   Office of Fire Marshal
   
93.12   Fire Prevention Division
   
93.13   Fire code adopted
   
93.14   Liability
   
93.14.1   Legal defense
   
93.15   Arson reward
   
93.16   Fire limits established
   
93.17   Minimum construction requirements in fire limits
   
93.18   Fees adopted
   
93.19   Certificates and inspection tags
 
   
93.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Airport, fire prevention regulations at, see
§ 90.022
   Buildings and general building regulations, see
Ch. 150
   Driver's duty:
      Upon approach of Fire Department vehicles, see §
71.15
      Following fire apparatus, see §
71.20
      Driving near scene of fire, see §
71.20
      Driving over fire hose, see§
71.21
   Electrical Code, see §§
150.055 et seq.
   Emergency vehicles, Fire Department vehicles designated as authorized, see §
70.01
   Fire Department officers to direct traffic, see §
70.68
   Fire protection business, see
Ch. 113
   House moving, clearances on fire equipment routes, see §
150.090
   Speed regulations, Fire Department vehicles exempt from, see §
71.45
   Traffic regulations, application to Fire Department vehicles, see §
70.07
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 FIRE DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   A Fire Department is hereby established for the city, charged with the
responsibility of providing protection for lives and property of the public.
The department may provide, but is not limited to service in the areas of fire
control, emergency medical service, rescue service, hazardous materials
control, fire prevention, code enforcement, and related public education
functions and shall enforce all municipal ordinances and laws, state and
federal, with whose enforcement it is charged. Nothing contained in this
chapter shall prevent the City Council from amending the Fire Department area
of responsibility as deemed necessary.
(Ord. 07-2004-41, passed 7-27-04)
§ 93.02 OFFICE OF FIRE CHIEF.
   The Fire Department shall be administered by the Fire Chief, who shall be
appointed by the city manager as prescribed by the city charter. The Fire Chief
shall be responsible for the proper administration and operation of the Fire
Department, subject to the supervision of the city manager and the regulations,
policies, charter, ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. The Fire
Chief shall promulgate rules, regulations and orders for the governing of the
Fire Department in accordance with the city code of ordinances and city
charter. The Fire Chief shall have exclusive control of the stationing,
transfer and work scheduling of all firefighters and other officers and
employees of the Fire Department in accordance with civil service law and city
rules and regulations. The Fire Chief shall have the right to discipline any of
the officers or employees of the department in accordance with Chapter 143 of
the Local Government Code, city rules, policies, and regulations, and Fire
Department rules and regulations and orders. The Fire Chief shall control all
stations, buildings, apparatus, equipment and other property of the Fire
Department or in the possession thereof.
(Ord. 07-2004-41, passed 7-27-04)
§ 93.03 AUTHORITY OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The Fire Chief or other officer of the Fire Department in charge at the
scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life or property
or any part thereof, shall have the authority to direct such operation as
necessary to extinguish or control any fire, perform any rescue operation,
provide emergency medical care, investigate the existence of suspected or
reported fires, hazardous conditions or situations, or take any other action
necessary in the reasonable performance of duty.
(Ord. 07-2004-41, passed 7-27-04)
§ 93.04 OBSTRUCTING FIRE DEPARTMENT OPERATIONS AND USE OF FIRE DEPARTMENT
PROPERTY FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITY.
   (A)   It shall be an offense for any person to obstruct the operations of
the Fire Department in connection with the extinguishment or control of any
fire, or actions relative to other emergencies, or disobey any lawful command
of the Fire Chief or other officer of the Fire Department in charge of an
emergency, or any part thereof, or any lawful order of a police officer
assisting the Fire Department.
   (B)   The buildings and premises of the Fire Services Department
(Administration Building) at 114 West Wardville Street, Fire Station 1 at 801
East Henderson Street, Fire Station 2 at 606 South Nolan River Road, and Fire
Station 3 at 901 West Kilpatrick Street are hereby designated as non-public
forums. These are buildings and premises at which official business of the Fire
Department is conducted, including training, maintenance of equipment,
administration, and other official department business.
   (C)   Except as permitted by division (D), it shall be unlawful for a person
to engage in protests, public speeches, marches, sit-ins, or demonstrations
promoting a point of view at the buildings or premises set forth in division
(B).
   (D)   Activity that is unlawful under division (C) is permitted:
      (1)   On adjacent sidewalks and public rights-of-way so long as the
activity is not conducted in the roadway;
      (2)   On the grass yards in front of Fire Stations 1, 2, and 3, but only
within ten feet of the public right-of-way; and
      (3)   Only if the activity does not obstruct vehicle or pedestrian
movement on any street, road, sidewalk or access to or from the buildings or
premises set forth in division (B).
   (E)   For the purposes of this section, the term DEMONSTRATION is defined as
the dissemination of information by displaying objects, placards, signs,
symbols, or engaging in expressive conduct concerning religious, political or
other views to the extent that such activities are protected by the First
Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article 1, Section 8 of the
Texas Constitution.
   (F)   For the purposes of this section, the term ROADWAY is defined as the
portion of a street or highway designed, improved or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, typically delineated by curbs, edgelines or the edge of the
pavement.
(Ord. 07-2004-41, passed 7-27-04; Am. Ord. 01-2015-05, passed 1-13- 15)
§ 93.05 FALSE ALARMS.
   It shall be an offense for any person, by any means or in any manner, give
an alarm of fire or other emergency situation requiring Fire Department
response, when such emergency does not exist.
Ord. 07-2004-41, passed 7-27-04)
§ 93.06 FIRE DEPARTMENT ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Fire Department of the city shall consist of two divisions based
on the similarity in duties and responsibilities within each respective
division. The first division shall be known as "Emergency Services" and the
second shall be known as "Fire Prevention." The Fire Chief may define
functional sections within each division and assign supervision
responsibilities as necessary.
   (B)   The Fire Chief may make assignments to any Fire Department activity as
manpower availability and the needs of the Fire Department arise.
   (C)   All of the duties performed within each classification are necessary
to the mission of the Fire Department and are of equal status. The Chief may,
in his or her discretion, vary or change assignments or reassign members to
accomplish the goals of providing effective service and ensuring the continuity
of the service. No member has the right to continue to perform any particular
duties within his or her classification. The Chief may make such temporary
assignments and/or out-of-class assignments as he or she may deem necessary to
accomplish the mission of the Fire Department.
(Ord. 07-2004-41, passed 7-27-04)
§ 93.07 EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT CHIEF.
   The Fire Chief, in accordance with Section 143.014 of the Local Government
Code, may appoint one person in the classification immediately below that of
Fire Chief, who will be assigned the duties of Executive Assistant Chief. The
person appointed under this section shall serve at the pleasure of the Fire
Chief and without civil service protection. Eligibility for appointment and the
rights of appointees hereunder shall be in accordance with Chapter 143 of the
Local Government Code.
(Ord. 07-2004-41, passed 7-27-04)
§ 93.08 EMERGENCY SERVICES DIVISION.
   (A)   The Fire Chief shall define functional sections within the Emergency
Services Division and assign supervision responsibilities to the Executive
Assistant Chief and the Assistant Chief of Operations as necessary.
   (B)   The Emergency Services Division shall perform all fire control
operations, emergency medical services, rescue operations, hazardous materials
operations and other duties as assigned by the Fire Chief.
   (C)   Every member assigned to the Emergency Services Division shall
satisfactorily complete the training and certification requirements as
established by the Texas Commission on Fire Protection Standards for Fire
Protection Personnel for a firefighter. Every member of the Emergency Services
Division shall have firefighting as one of his or her primary duties.
(Ord. 07-2004-41, passed 7-27-04)
§ 93.09 WORK PERIODS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The work period for employees scheduled to work 2,080 hours annually
shall be a seven-consecutive-day, 40-hour work period. All non-exempt employees
assigned to a seven-day work period shall be compensated at a rate of one and
one-half times the regular rate of pay for all hours worked in excess of 40
hours within the work period.
   (B)   The work period for employees in fire protection activities and
scheduled to work 2,912 hours annually shall be a 14-consecutive- day, 106-hour
work period. All non-exempt employees engaged in fire protection activities and
assigned to a 14-day work period shall be compensated at a rate of one and one-
half times the regular rate of pay for all hours worked in excess of 106 within
the work period.
   (C)   The beginning and ending of the seven-day work period and the 14-day
work period will be established by city policy and may be changed, provided the
change is intended to be permanent and not designed to evade overtime
compensation. The Fire Chief, at his discretion, may assign an employee to the
seven-day work period or the 14-day work period.
(Ord. 07-2004-41, passed 7-27-04; Am. Ord. 01-2014-06, passed 1-28- 14; Am.
Ord. 10-2025-35, passed 10-14-25)
§ 93.10 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE CHARGES.
   (A)   The following words, terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed
to them in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates
another meaning:
      BUSINESS ENTITY or PERSON. Any corporation, sole proprietorship,
partnership, limited partnership, firm or other similar entity, or any
individual person, engaged in any commercial, business or industrial
transactions of any nature.
      HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance defined under Section 101 (14) of
CERCLA; any biological agent or other disease-causing agent which, after
release into the environment and upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation, or
assimilation by ingestion through food chains, will or may reasonably be
anticipated to cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic
mutation, physiological malfunctions (including malfunctions in reproduction)
or physical deformations in such persons or their offspring; any substance
listed by the U.S. Department of Transportation as hazardous materials under 49
CFR 172.101 and appendices; or any hazardous waste as defined under 29 CFR
1910.120.
      RESPONSIBLE PARTY. All persons involved in the possession, ownership or
transportation of any hazardous material that is released or abandoned, or who
have legal liability for the causation of an incident resulting in the release
or abandonment of any hazardous materials.
      SERVICE. A response by one or more Fire Department units to an incident
involving a leakage, spill and/or other release and/or abandonment of any
hazardous material.
      SERVICE CALL. The period of time from the arrival of Fire Department
units at the site where the service is to be performed, to the return of all
department units to an available status.
   (B)   In order to partially defray the costs incurred by the city for
providing hazardous materials service by the Fire Department, charges are
hereby established to be paid and collected from the responsible party.
      (1)   For service calls of one hour or less, the responsible party shall
pay for expendable supplies, plus an additional 20% of the cost of the
expendable supplies.
      (2)   For service calls of more than one hour, the responsible party
shall pay $100 per quarter hour for every quarter hour, or portion thereof,
over the first hour. The responsible party shall also pay for expendable
supplies, plus an additional 20% of the cost of the expendable supplies.
   (C)   If the responsible party cannot be identified or refuses to remedy all
hazardous conditions created by leakage, spill and/or other release and/or
abandonment of a hazardous material, the Fire Department may contract with a
third party to complete the necessary remedial measures. The responsible party
shall pay for all third party costs, plus an additional 20% of third party
cost, associated with the hazardous materials remediation.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of each responsible party to report any incident
involving any leakage, release, spill or abandonment of any hazardous materials
to the Fire Department immediately upon the discovery of the same, or as soon
thereafter as possible.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any individual
who constitutes a responsible party as hereinabove defined shall not be
required to pay charges authorized under division (B) of this section if all of
the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The responsible party does not illegally dispose of nor abandon
substances deemed as hazardous materials; and
      (2)   The individual otherwise responsible or liable for the release of a
hazardous material is not involved in the possession, ownership or
transportation of the hazardous material as the employee, agent or servant of
any business entity or person; and
      (3)   The individual involved in the possession, ownership or
transportation of the hazardous material released is so involved solely for
private, non-commercial purposes related to the individual's own residential
property, real property or private personal property, and the individual
receives or is to receive no compensation for any services involving the
hazardous materials; and
      (4)   The hazardous material possessed, owned or being transported by the
individual are in forms, quantities and containers ordinarily and lawfully
available for sale as consumer products to members of the general public.
   (F)   This section shall not apply to any hazardous materials possessed,
owned or transported by the city, the state (including its political
subdivisions) or the federal government.
(Ord. 07-2004-41, passed 7-27-04)
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 93.11 OFFICE OF FIRE MARSHAL.
   (A)   The office of Fire Marshal is hereby established. The position of Fire
Marshal is a duty assignment appointed by the Fire Chief. This assignment may
or may not be a classified civil service position and as such serves at the
pleasure of the Fire Chief.
   (B)   The Fire Marshal shall report directly to the Fire Chief and shall
supervise the operations of the Fire Prevention Division.
 
   (C)   The Fire Marshal shall satisfactorily complete the training and
certification requirements as established by the Texas Commission on Law
Enforcement and the Texas Commission on Fire Protection Standards for Fire
Protection Personnel for basic Arson Investigator and the Texas Commission on
Fire Protection Standards for Fire Protection Personnel for Fire Inspector I
and Plans Examiner.
   (D)   The Fire Marshal shall have the authority to investigate or cause to
be investigated the cause, origin and circumstances of any fire, explosion or
other condition deemed hazardous to life or property.
   (E)   The Fire Marshal shall be empowered to summon any person believed to
have knowledge or information pertaining to an investigation conducted by the
Fire Department, to appear and provide information pertinent to such
investigation. A person commits an offense if the person with criminal
negligence interrupts, disrupts, impedes, or otherwise interferes with a Fire
Department official investigating the cause of a fire.
(Ord. 07-2004-41, passed 7-27-04; Am. Ord. 10-2022-76, passed 10-25-22)
§ 93.12 FIRE PREVENTION DIVISION.
   (A)   Under direction of the Chief, the Fire Marshal shall supervise the
Fire Prevention Division. Every member of the Fire Prevention Division shall
satisfactorily complete the training and certification requirements as
established by the Texas Commission on Fire Protection Standards for Fire
Protection Personnel for a Fire Inspector and the Texas Commission on Fire
Protection Standards for Fire Protection Personnel for Fire Investigator I and
Plans Examiner.
   (B)   The Fire Chief shall assign members to the Fire Marshal’s Office. The
members of the Fire Prevention Division shall be empowered to enforce the
provisions of the fire code, and to issue such permits as are required by the
fire code, and to issue citations for violations of the fire code and city
ordinances, and to investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of any fire,
explosion or other condition deemed hazardous to life or property.
   (C)   The Fire Prevention Division shall conduct fire prevention education
programs for the benefit of schools, businesses, commercial enterprises,
industrial occupancies, hospitals, convalescent homes, churches and the general
public in the interest of fire prevention and public safety.
(Ord. 07-2004-41, passed 7-27-04; Am. Ord. 10-2022-76, passed 10-25-22)
§ 93.13 FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
   The city hereby adopts the 2021 edition of the International Fire Code.
Copies of the code and the amendments thereto, as referenced in this section,
are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent record and
inspection. In addition thereto, the city hereby adopts the recommended
amendments to the 2021 International Fire Code prepared by the North Central
Texas Council of Governments, which are attached to Ordinance OR10-2022-76 as
Exhibit A. Exhibit A is not set out herein, but is on file and available for
inspection in the office of the City Secretary. The chief fire official, or his
authorized representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all
provisions of the International Fire Code, as adopted herein and as amended.
(Ord. 09-2017-62, passed 9-26-17; Am. Ord. 10-2022-76, passed 10-25-22)
§ 93.14 LIABILITY. 
   The Fire Code Official, officer or employee charged with the enforcement of
this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered
liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any
damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required or
permitted in the discharge of official duties.
(Ord. 10-2022-76, passed 10-25-22)
§ 93.14.1 LEGAL DEFENSE.
   (A)   Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act
performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and
under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative
of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The Fire
Code Official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action,
suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this
code; and any officer of the Fire Marshal's office, acting in good faith and
without malice, shall be free from all liability for acts performed under any
of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of
official duties in connection therewith.
   (B)   All regulations provided in this Fire Code are hereby declared to be
governmental and for the benefit of the general public. Any member of the City
Council, any city official or employee or any member of the Building and
Standards Commission charged with the enforcement of this Fire Code, acting for
the city in the discharge of their duties, shall be indemnified and defended by
the City of Cleburne in accordance with the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 10-2022-76, passed 10-25-22)
§ 93.15 ARSON REWARD.
   (A)   The city shall maintain a standing reward and shall be bound and
obligated to pay a reward, and this section shall constitute a standing offer
by the city and be an obligation and an agreement by the city to pay a reward
of $1,000 to any person voluntarily furnishing or obtaining the information
leading to the arrest and conviction of any person guilty of the crime and
offense of arson committed within the city limits.
   (B)   No person who at the time he or she furnishes such information is an
official or employee of the city or a state or county official shall be
entitled directly or indirectly to receive such reward or any part thereof.
   (C)   Not more than one reward shall be paid for any one fire, and in case
two or more persons shall claim the reward the city shall not be liable to pay
such reward unless and until a court of competent jurisdiction has established
the rights of the parties without cost to the city.
   (D)   No claims for the reward shall be allowed or paid unless the claim is
filed with the City Council within 30 days after the arrest and conviction has
become final, and unless the claim is so filed within 30 days the liability of
the city for payment of such reward shall cease.
(Ord. 07-2004-41, passed 7-27-04)
§ 93.16 FIRE LIMITS ESTABLISHED.
   All property, lots and blocks included within the boundary lines hereinafter
set forth shall make and constitute the fire limits of the city:
      Beginning at the point in the center of South Mill Street where the same
intersects the center of West Chambers Street; thence south with the center of
South Mill Street to the center of West Harrell Street; thence east with the
center of West Harrell Street and East Harrell Street to the center of South
Anglin Street; thence south with the center of South Anglin Street to the
center of East Shaffer Street; thence east with the center of East Shaffer
Street to the center of South Robinson Street; thence north with the center of
South Robinson Street to the center of East James Street; thence east with the
center of East James Street to the center of South Wilhite Street; thence north
with the center of South Wilhite Street to the center of East Chambers Street;
thence east with the center of East Chambers Street to the center of South
Border Street; thence north with the center of South Border Street and North
Border Street to the center of East Wardville Street; thence west with the
center of East Wardville Street to the center of North Caddo Street; thence
north with the center of North Caddo Street to the center of East Brown Street;
thence west with the center of East Brown Street to the center North main
Street; thence north with the center of North Main Street to the center of West
Willingham Street; thence west with the center of West Willingham Street to the
center of West Buffalo Creek; thence southwest with the center of West Buffalo
Creek to the center of North Buffalo Street; thence south with the center of
North Buffalo Street to the center of West Henderson Street; thence east with
the center of West Henderson Street to the center of North Hillsboro Street;
thence south with the center of North Hillsboro Street to the center of West
Chambers Street; thence east with the center of West Chambers Street to the
center of Mill Street, the place of beginning.
(Ord. 07-2004-41, passed 7-27-04; Am. Ord. 08-2011-44, passed 8-9-11; Am. Ord.
02-2016-12, passed 2-23-16)
§ 93.17 MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS IN FIRE LIMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, repair, enlarge or
place in or upon any block or lot, or part thereof, within the established fire
limits, any structure or building other than such that conforms to the
requirements of type IIA construction. The type IIA construction is a minimum
requirement for all occupancies. The building code may require a higher
construction classification type for certain occupancies.
(Ord. 07-2004-41, passed 7-27-04)
§ 93.18 FEES ADOPTED.
Certificate of occupancy                                           $30
Burn permit
   Residential or special event bonfire                         $25
   Commercial (30 days) <20 acres                               $250
   Commercial (30 days) >20 acres                               $500
Fireworks
   Fireworks display/show (single use)                          $100
   Fireworks display/show (annual use)                          $500
Plan review automatic fire extinguishing systems
   Automatic systems 1-20 heads                                 $100
   Automatic systems 21-250 heads                               $175
   Automatic systems 251-499 heads                              $250
   Automatic systems 500 heads or greater                       $350 +
   Additional heads                                             $350 + $0.50
                                                                   per head
   Remodels, additions and relocations                          $50 + $0.50
                                                                   per head
   Reinspection                                                 Half the
                                                                   initial cost
Plan review fire alarm detection related equipment
   Fire alarm/detection related equipment 1-10 devices          $100
   Fire alarm/detection related equipment 11-25 devices         $175
   Fire alarm/detection related equipment 26-150 devices        $250
   Fire alarm/detection related equipment 151-499 devices       $350
                                                                   $350 + $0.50
   Fire alarm/detection related equipment 500+ devices          per
                                                                   additional
                                                                   device
   Fire alarm/detection related equipment remodel, addition and $100 + $0.50
relocation                                                         per devices
   Reinspection                                                 Half the
                                                                   initial cost
Other systems and operations
   Smoke control, elevator recall, door access control          $50
   Fire pumps and related equipment                             $100
   Standpipe systems                                            $50
   Private fire hydrant                                         $50
   Flammable and combustible liquids                            $100
   Hazardous materials                                          $100
   LLP - gas                                                    $100
   Spraying or dipping operations                               $100
   Temporary membrane structures - tents and canopies           $75
   Carnival or circus                                           $150
Annual fire inspections
   Tax-exempt agencies (excluding daycares)                     Exempt
   Commercial/public 12,000 sq.ft. and <                        No cost
      First reinspection                                     $25
      Second reinspection                                    $50
   Commercial/public 12,000 sq. ft. and >
   (Includes all fire sprinkled buildings regardless of square  $100
feet)
      First reinspection                                     $150
      Second and subsequent reinspection                     $200
   Mobile food truck/trailers                                   $50
Licensed facilities
   Day care center                                              $50
   Foster homes                                                 $50
   Schools and educational occupancies (public)                 Free
                                                                   Based on
   Schools and educational occupancies (private)                commercial
                                                                   rates
   Nursing/assisted living facilities                           $150
   Hospitals                                                    $250
Underground storage tank installation or removal (including temporary)
   <1,000 gallons                                               $50
   >1,000 gallons                                               $100
   LPG tank installation or removal                             $50
Inspection no-show
   Failure to attend a scheduled inspection                     $50 +
   After 30 minute wait time                                    Cost of
                                                                   inspection
Ansul system test/inspection
   Test and inspection                                          $50
Variance request
   Application                                                  $50
Hydrant flow test
   Fire Department conducted                                    $100
   Fire Department witnessed                                    Free
 
(Ord. 10-2013-67, passed 10-8-13; Am. Ord. 10-2022-76, passed 10-25-22)
§ 93.19 CERTIFICATES AND INSPECTION TAGS.
   It shall be the owner or occupant's responsibility to maintain a copy of the
fire alarm installation certificate at the protected premises. It shall also be
the owner or occupant's responsibility to maintain upon the door of the fire
alarm control panel an inspection tag of the type provided by a state certified
fire alarm company, as approved by the Chief or authorized representative,
showing the date that the fire alarm system was tested and the results of the
test. It shall also be the owner or occupant's responsibility to maintain upon
the fire sprinkler riser, an inspection tag of the type provided by a state
certified fire sprinkler company, showing the date that the fire sprinkler
system was inspected.
(Ord. 10-2022-76, passed 10-25-22)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   It is an offense for a person, firm, company, or corporation to violate,
disobey, omit, neglect, refuse to comply with, or resist the enforcement of any
of the provisions of this chapter. Each day that a violation occurs or is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. An offense under this
section is a Class C misdemeanor. Any offense for which no other penalty is set
forth in this chapter shall be subject to the penalty set forth in § 10.99.
(Ord. 07-2004-41, passed 7-27-04; Am. Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-17-18)
CHAPTER 94: REGULATIONS OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL FOOD STORES, MOBILE FOOD
UNITS AND ROADSIDE FOOD VENDORS
Section
   
94.01   Purpose
   
94.02   Codes adopted
   
94.03   Permits and exceptions
   
94.04   Application for permits and fees
   
94.05   Review of plans
   
94.06   Food protection manager certification
   
94.07   Suspension of permit
   
94.08   Revocation of permit
   
94.09   Administrative process
   
94.10   Grease traps
   
94.11   Vent-a-hood systems
   
94.12   Backflow prevention and cross connection control
 
   
94.80   Fee schedule
 
   
94.98   Penalties
   
94.99   Severability
Editor's note:
   Meat inspections are now covered by state regulations. For the duties of the
state Commissioner and Board of Health, see Tex. Health and Safety Code §
11.013. For the provisions of the Texas Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, see Tex.
Health and Safety Code §§ 431.001 et seq.
§ 94.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these rules is to safeguard public health and provide to
consumers food that is safe, unadulterated, and honestly presented.
(Ord. 02-2000-18, passed 2-22-00)
§ 94.02 ADOPTION OF THE TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES.
   (A)   The city adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or
rules as amended by the Texas Board of Health found in 25 Texas Administrative
Code, Chapter 229, §§ 161 through 171 and 173 through 175 regarding the
regulation of food establishments within the city limits.
   (B)   Definitions.
   REGULATORY AUTHORITY. City of Cleburne Health Department.
   AUTHORIZED AGENT OR EMPLOYEE. City of Cleburne Health Inspector.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. A food service establishment, a retail food store, a
mobile food unit, and/or a roadside food vendor.
   SMOKING or TO SMOKE The act of smoking or carrying a lighted or smoldering
cigar, cigarette or pipe of any kind or lighting a cigar, cigarette or pipe of
any kind.
   STATE RULES. The state rules found at 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter
229, §§ 161 through 171 and 173 through 175. These rules are also known as the
Texas Food Establishment Rules.
(Ord. 02-2000-18, passed 2-22-00)
§ 94.03 PERMITS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   A person may not operate a food establishment without a permit issued
by the regulatory authority. Permits are not transferrable from one person to
another or from one location to another location, except as otherwise permitted
by this chapter. A valid permit must be posted in or on every food
establishment regulated by this chapter.
   (B)   A food establishment operated solely by a nonprofit organization is
exempt from the permitting requirements of this chapter, but is not exempt from
compliance with state rules. The regulatory authority may require any
information necessary to determine whether an organization is nonprofit for the
purposes of this exemption.
   (C)   Temporary food permits may be obtained for $25.00 for food events held
from one to five days.
(Ord. 02-2000-18, passed 2-22-00)
§ 94.04 APPLICATION FOR PERMITS AND FEES.
   (A)   Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a
written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority.
The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the
location and type of the proposed food establishment and the applicable fee. An
incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to provide all required
information or falsifying information required may result in denial or
revocation of the permit.
   (B)   Renewals for permits are required on an annual basis. All permits will
expire on December 31st of each year. Renewal fees must be received prior to
December 31st. Renewal fees received after December 31st will be double the
permit fee. The same application information is required for a renewal permit
as for an initial permit.
   (C)   Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an
existing permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect the proposed food
establishment to determine compliance with state laws and rules. A food
establishment that does not comply with state laws and rules will be denied a
permit or the renewal of a permit.
(Ord. 02-2000-18, passed 2-22-00; Am. Ord. 9-2002-66, passed 9-10-02; Am. Ord.
04-2011-12, passed 4-12-11)
§ 94.05 REVIEW OF PLANS.
   (A)   Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled
and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment,
properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or
conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review before
work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that 20% or greater of the area of
the food establishment is to be remodeled. The plans and specifications shall
indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and
construction of materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed
fixed equipment and facilities. The plans and specifications will be approved
by the regulatory authority if they meet the requirements of the rules adopted
by this chapter. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in
construction, remodeling, or conversion.
   (B)   Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in
a permit denial, suspension, or revocation.
(Ord. 02-2000-18, passed 2-22-00)
§ 94.06 FOOD PROTECTION MANAGER CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   A Food Protection Manager Certificate will be required as follows:
      (1)   Food establishments with less than five employees - At least one
person per establishment.
      (2)   Food establishments with more than five employees - At least one
manager or person in charge on each shift must hold a certificate for Food
Protection Management.
   (B)   The certificate that shows proof of passing the written exam must be
maintained on the premises with a copy sent to the regulatory authority for
file. The certified manager is responsible for training the employees of the
establishment in proper food handling procedures. Temporary food service
establishments and food service establishments that handle only prepackaged
foods and nonpotentially hazardous foods which require only limited preparation
are exempt from the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 02-2000-18, passed 2-22-00)
§ 94.07 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing
suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation of the food
establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. Whenever a
permit is suspended, written notice will be given to the permit holder, at
which time all food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is
suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for a
hearing as described in division (B) of this section.
   (B)   Whenever a permit is suspended, the permit holder or the person in
charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is immediately suspended
and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for
a hearing with the Public Works Director is filed with the regulatory authority
by the permit holder within ten days. If no written request for hearing is
filed within ten days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority
may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist.
   (C)   A permit will be automatically suspended if there exist violations
totaling more than 30 demerits during any one inspection. Food operations will
immediately cease until corrective actions are taken to decrease the demerits,
and a reinspection has been performed by the regulatory authority.
(Ord. 02-2000-18, passed 2-22-00)
§ 94.08 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a
hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the
requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority
in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority
shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of
the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit
shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice
unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority
by the holder of the permit within such ten day period.
   (B)   If no request for hearing is filed within the ten days period, the
revocation of the permit becomes final.
(Ord. 02-2000-18, passed 2-22-00)
§ 94.09 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS.
   (A)   A notice as required in these rules is properly served when it is
delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is
sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last
known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed
in the records of the regulatory authority.
   (B)   The hearings provided for these rules shall be conducted by the
regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the
recorded evidence of such hearing the regulatory authority shall make final
finding, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in
the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the
holder of the permit by the regulatory authority.
(Ord. 02-2000-18, passed 2-22-00)
§ 94.10 GREASE TRAPS.
   (A)   Applicability and minimum size.
      (1)   All food establishments must be equipped with a grease trap. A
plumbing permit must be obtained by a licensed plumber prior to installation of
a grease trap. Day care centers and churches with commercial kitchen operations
are included as food establishments.
      (2)   Grease traps shall be installed and sized in accordance with the
currently adopted plumbing code or the sizing chart adopted by Ordinance 04-
2022-39 or its successor ordinances, whichever requires a larger trap. The
chart must be updated by ordinance every five years to account for advances in
technology and changes in best practices based on a survey of benchmark cities.
      (3)   The applicant may request the use of a smaller trap according to
the following process:
         (a)   If the sizing chart requires a size that is larger than the
plumbing code, the Health Inspector may grant the use of a smaller trap sized
according to the plumbing code;
         (b)   If the plumbing code requires a size that is larger than the
sizing chart, the Building Official may grant the use of a smaller trap sized
according to the chart.
      (4)   Dishwashers and food waste grinders are not acceptable substitutes
for a grease trap and will not be permitted in lieu of a grease trap.
   (B)   Location of grease traps. Grease traps installed in food
establishments shall be located outside of the establishment unless approved in
writing by the Health Inspector, or authorized designee.
      (1)   A grease trap shall not be installed in any part of a building
where food is handled or stored. Grease traps shall be located to be easily
accessible for cleaning and where equipment or personnel servicing the trap
would not pass through food handling or storage areas.
      (2)   Wastewater sample ports must be located in an area with 24-hour
access, outside the building, after the grease trap and before co-mingling with
other wastewater.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Roadside vendors, temporary food establishments, day care centers
and churches without a commercial kitchen, and concession stands are exempt
from the requirement of grease traps. The Health Inspector may grant other
exceptions based upon food operations.
      (2)   Mobile food vendors are required to have a central preparation
kitchen that complies with Texas Food Establishment Rules within the Texas
Administrative Code.
      (3)   Downtown. Within the downtown area as identified on the adopted
Future Land Use Map, the Building Official may issue a permit for an
alternative size and type of grease trap, including a trap that is located
inside a building, if the trap is certified in writing by a licensed engineer.
         (a)   Once the trap is installed, the trap must be operated per
manufacturer specifications. Manufacturer specifications must be provided to
the Health Inspector and retained on site for compliance verification of waste
removal schedule and health permit requirements.
         (b)   Oils, fats, and greases must be removed from the trap per
manufacturer specifications or as often as deemed necessary by the Health
Inspector to maintain sanitary conditions within the building and to prevent
such oils, fats, and greases from entering the city sewer system.
   (D)   Cleaning and sanitation. All areas surrounding treatment devices,
sample ports and holding tanks shall be kept clean and free of fats, oils and
grease, and other wastes that create odors or attract pests. Additionally,
these areas shall be maintained to facilitate immediate access for cleaning by
the user and inspection by the city at all times.
      (1)   Wastes shall not be spilled, splashed, allowed to overflow, or
otherwise placed on the area surrounding treatment devices.
      (2)   In the event wastes are spilled, splashed, allowed to overflow, or
otherwise placed on the area surrounding the treatment device, the owner or
operator of the business is responsible for cleaning all waste from the area
and ensuring that the waste is properly removed according to divisions (D) and
(E).
      (3)   A user shall not remove any inlet or outlet piping or otherwise
alter a treatment device in any way which may allow fats, oils and grease,
flammable wastes, sand or other objectionable wastes to pass through the
treatment device into the wastewater collection system.
      (4)   During cleaning activities, residues shall be removed from piping
and walls of the treatment devices. Additionally, the piping and walls of the
treatment device shall be inspected to assure the integrity of the device is
maintained.
   (E)   Waste removal schedule. All grease trap waste shall be pumped and
removed, and its tanks thoroughly cleaned at least once every three months.
      (1)   Any deviation from this schedule must be granted in writing from
the Health Inspector.
      (2)   The Health Inspector may require additional pumping, increase the
frequency of cleanings, or require immediate pumping of a grease trap if the
Health Inspector deems it necessary in order to prevent grease from entering
the city sanitary sewer system.
      (3)   Treatment devices shall be maintained in an efficient operating
condition by the owner or operator at his or her expense and shall produce a
discharge that complies with this division, other divisions of this section and
Chapter 51.
      (4)   Any establishment who utilizes microorganisms in any grease trap
within the city will still be required to comply with the aforementioned
pumping schedule.
   (F)   Transportation. All grease waste must be transported by a grease waste
hauler licensed by TCEQ. The grease hauler is responsible for proper disposal
of grease waste in an approved permitted site. It is the responsibility of the
grease waste hauler to forward a copy of each waste trip ticket to the
regulatory authority.
   (G)   Enforcement remedies. If the property owner fails to maintain a grease
trap in a sanitary working condition or fails to comply with any other
provision or requirement of this section, the city may pursue any
administrative remedy at its disposal to protect the public health, including
discontinuance of water or electrical service, revocation of certificate of
occupancy, or issuance of an industrial user wastewater discharge permit with
stipulated regulatory compliance.
   (H)   Change of operation. If a property changes its use, or a use changes
its operations, such as adding or expanding a commercial kitchen, the city may
require that a grease trap be installed or that an existing trap be increased
in size. The Building Official may withhold issuing a certificate of occupancy
until the grease trap has been installed to the size and capacity required
under this chapter.
(Ord. 02-2000-18, passed 2-22-00; Am. Ord. 04-2022-39, passed 4-26-22)
§ 94.11 VENT-A-HOOD SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Equipment. All food establishments whose cooking equipment used in
processes producing smoke or grease-laden vapors shall be equipped with an
exhaust system that complies with all the equipment and performance
requirements of the NFPA96 Code, (National Fire Protection Association Code)
and all such equipment and performance shall be maintained per the NFPA96 Code
during a periods of operation of the cooking equipment. Specifically, the
following equipment shall be kept in good working condition: (a) cooking
equipment, (b) hoods, (c) ducts, (d) fans, (e) fire suppression systems, and
(f) special effluent or energy control equipment. All airflows shall be
maintained. Maintenance and repairs shall be performed on all components at
intervals necessary to maintain these conditions. At least one manual fire
extinguisher shall be mounted on a wall within the kitchen area for secondary
protection.
   (B)   Cleaning. The entire exhaust system shall be inspected and cleaned by
a properly trained, qualified, and certified company or person(s) acceptable to
the Cleburne Fire Marshal. Hoods, grease removal devices, fans, horizontal and
vertical ducts to the roof, and other appurtenances shall be cleaned to bare
metal, prior to surfaces becoming heavily contaminated with grease or oily
sludge. The chart below indicates the required cleaning schedule:
 
Type or Volume of Cooking                                                       Frequency
   Establishments serving solid fuel cooking operations.                     Monthly
   Systems serving high-volume cooking operations such as a 24 hour cooking, Quarterly
charbroiling or work cooking.
   Systems serving moderate-volume cooking  operations.                      Semi-
                                                                                annually
   Systems serving low-volume cooking  operations, such as churches, day campAnnually
seasonal businesses, or senior centers.
 
   The Cleburne Fire Marshal may require additional cleaning or increase the
frequency of cleanings if he deems it necessary in order to prevent a fire
hazard. After the exhaust system is cleaned to bare metals, it shall not be
coated with powder or other substance. Care shall be taken not to apply
cleaning chemicals on fusible links or other detection devices of the automatic
extinguishing system. After cleaning is completed, the vent cleaning contractor
shall place a label on the vent-a-hood indicating the date cleaned and the name
of the servicing company. A certificate showing the cleaning date shall be
maintained on the premises, and a copy forwarded to the Cleburne Fire Marshal's
office.
   (C)   Inspection. An inspection and servicing of the fire extinguishing
system and listed exhaust hoods shall be made at least once every six months by
properly trained and qualified persons. Certification tags indicating date
inspected should be posted at the pull station and on the vent-a-hood unit. A
certificate showing the inspection and servicing date shall be maintained on
the premises, and a copy forwarded to the Cleburne Fire Marshall's office.
(Ord. 02-2000-18, passed 2-22-00)
§ 94.12 BACKFLOW PREVENTION & CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL.
   All food establishments must comply with the Texas Food Establishment Rules,
the currently adopted Plumbing Code and §
150.044 of this code.
(Ord. 02-2000-18, passed 2-22-00)
§ 94.80 FEE SCHEDULE.
   The following fee schedule applies to health permits issued under this
chapter:
Bakeries (stand alone)                                        $125
Bed-N-Breakfast                                               $125
Catering Kitchens                                             $125
Church Kitchens (only if selling food for public events)      $125
Concession Stands                                             $125
Convenience Stores                                            $125
Convenience Stores (with deli or grill)                       $200
Day Care Centers (food areas and environmental health         $150
inspection for entire facility)
Farmers/Flea Markets (commercial vendors) {'{'}produce stands Per Booth - $35
are exempt by state law{'}'}
Foster Homes                                                  $50
Grocery Stores - Large Dry Goods (less than 25% grocery area) $200
Grocery Stores - Small Dry Goods (less than 25% grocery area) $150
   Deli’s in Grocery Stores                              $125
 
   Meat Market in Grocery Stores     $125
   Bakery in Grocery Stores          $125
Hospital (food area only)               $200
Hotel Motel with food area (percentage  $225
of rooms inspected)
Hotel Motel without food area           $100
(percentage of rooms inspected)
                                        Hot trucks - $200
                                        Cold trucks - $150
Mobile Vendors                          Ice cream push carts - $125
                                        Sno cone stands - $125
                                        Temporary event - $35
Nursing Homes (food area only)          $150
Public Pools (apartments/hotel/motel/   Pools - $100
municipal and fitness centers)          Spas - $50
Plan Reviews (new construction)         $25
                                        Based on square feet area of food prep,
                                        dining, storage, support areas
Restaurants                                up to 2,500 sq ft - $125
                                           2,501 - 5,000 sq ft - $200
                                           Over 5,000 sq ft - $250
                                        Based on square feet area of food prep,
Schools (food areas and environmental   dining, storage, support areas
health inspection for entire facility)     up to 2,500 sq ft - $125
                                           2,501 - 5,000 sq ft - $200
                                           Over 5,000 sq ft - $250
                                        Commercial vendors - $35
                                        Non-profit vendors - $10
                                        Non-profit vendors must provide copy
                                        their 501(c)3 certificate
Temporary Event Food Vendors (valid for Community events - $35
3-5 days only)                          Community event permits are valid for
                                        the entire event where ALL proceeds
                                        benefit the event. Examples: relay for
                                        life, fun runs, campfire, boy and girl
                                        scouts, 4-H Youth, etc.
 
   (A)   Health permit applications received from January 1 to September 31,
will expire on December 31 that same year.
   (B)   Health permit applications received after October 1 through December
31, will expire December 31 the following year.
   (C)   All permit renewal fees received after December 31 will be double the
annual permit fee.
(Ord. 04-2011-12, passed 4-12-11)
§ 94.98 PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates or fails to comply with §§
94.01 through
94.12 or the provisions of the Texas Food Establishment rules, and any person
who is the permit holder of or otherwise operates a food service establishment
that does not comply with the requirements of these rules, and any responsible
officer of that permit holder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction shall be fined not more than $2,000 each day any violation or
noncompliance continues. Each day any violation or noncompliance continues
shall constitute a separate offense. The regulatory authority may seek to
enjoin violations of these rules.
(Ord. 02-2000-18, passed 2-22-00; Am. Ord. 04-2011-12, passed 4-12-11)
§ 94.99 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter.
CHAPTER 95: GARAGE SALES
Section
   
95.01   Purpose
   
95.02   Applicability
   
95.03   Definitions
   
95.04   Permits required
   
95.05   Maximum number of garage sales
   
95.06   Permit nontransferable
   
95.07   Term of permit
   
95.08   Application for permit
   
95.09   Possession of permit
   
95.10   Temporary garage sale signs
   
95.11   Hours of operation
   
95.12   Charitable, religious, educational, or nonprofit garage sales
   
95.13   No additional authority to sell food products
   
95.14   Display and sale of items
   
95.15   Enforcement
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the residential character and
nature of the diverse neighborhoods throughout the city. The City Council
recognizes the importance of championing great neighborhoods. The City Council
desires to protect residential areas within the city limits from the
encroachment of commercial uses. The intent of adopting these garage sale
regulations is to promote and protect the health, safety, comfort, economic
investment, quiet enjoyment, and general welfare of the people residing within
the city.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 95.02 APPLICABILITY.
   The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all garage sales conducted
or advertised within the city. Notwithstanding, the City Manager may designate
one or more days for a community-wide event and may waive certain requirements
of this chapter.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 95.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED DEPARTMENT. The department designated by the City Manager to
administer the provisions of this chapter.
   GARAGE SALE. All general sales, open or advertised to the public, conducted
from or on a residential premises or a self-storage (mini warehouse facility),
in any zoning use district, for the purpose of disposing of tangible personal
property. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sales entitled
“garage,” “lawn,” “yard,” “room,” “estate,” “auction,” “moving,” “backyard,”
“patio,” “rummage” and “neighborhood.” For purposes of this chapter, a private
invitation-only event for the sale of tangible personal property within a
residence is not a garage sale but may constitute a home-based business as
regulated by §§
155.3 and
155.7.
   INDIVIDUAL LOCATION. A property with an approved residence or a self-storage
(mini warehouse facility) with a unique physical address recognized by the
city. For the purposes of this chapter, an individual location shall be real
property, have a distinct Central Appraisal District account number and may be
a single-family dwelling, a multi-family dwelling with three or fewer dwelling
units on the property, or a self-storage facility. Each of the terms referenced
herein shall have the same meanings as defined in
Ch. 155.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, sole proprietorship, corporation,
association, nonprofit corporation, partnership, joint venture, limited
liability company, estate, trust, public or private organization.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 95.04 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, participate in, or
allow the operation of a garage sale without first obtaining a garage sale
permit from the city.
   (B)   The fee for a garage sale permit shall be as adopted by the City
Council as part of the city’s fee schedule.
   (C)   Upon approval of a garage sale permit application, the city shall
issue one permit for each garage sale; provided, however, that the individual
location proposed for the garage sale has not exceeded the maximum number of
garage sales allowed per calendar year.
   (D)   A customer or potential customer of a garage sale shall not be held
liable if attending an unpermitted garage sale; provided they are not otherwise
participating in the garage sale.
   (E)   No more than three families may combine their property for sale at a
single garage sale.
   (F)   A garage sale permit will not be issued for a vacant lot or a lot with
an unoccupied main structure.
   (G)   A multi-family complex with more than three dwelling units on the
property shall not be eligible for individual garage sale permits. The owner/
operator of an apartment complex may apply for a garage sale permit for the
entire multi-family complex, but individual apartments, units, or buildings
within the complex may not apply.
   (H)   A person renting one or more storage units at a self-storage facility
shall not be eligible for individual garage sale permits. The owner/operator of
a self-storage facility may apply for a garage sale permit for the entire
facility, but individual units within the facility may not apply.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 95.05 MAXIMUM NUMBER OF GARAGE SALES.
   (A)   A residential property shall not conduct more than two garage sales
within a calendar year.
   (B)   A self-storage (mini warehouse facility) or apartment complex shall
not conduct more than two garage sales within a calendar year.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 95.06 PERMIT NONTRANSFERABLE.
   A garage sale permit may not be transferred to another person or individual
location address.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 95.07 TERM OF PERMIT.
   (A)   All garage sale permits shall only be valid for the dates and times
specified on the permit.
   (B)   No garage sale shall exceed three consecutive days.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 95.08 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   A garage sale permit application shall be on an approved form,
completed, and submitted to the city for each individual garage sale.
   (B)   The application shall contain all the information necessary for the
city to be advised of the date(s), location, residence of operation of the
garage sale, and any other information that may be reasonably necessary to
process the application.
   (C)   A garage sale permit may only be obtained by the legal owner of the
residential property, lessee of the residential property or owner/operator of a
self-storage facility upon which the garage sale is proposed to be conducted.
   (D)   If the residential property upon which the garage sale is proposed is
legally conveyed or leased to another person, the new owner or lessee of the
residential property shall, upon approval of an application for a garage sale
permit, be authorized to conduct up to two garage sales within a calendar year.
The sale or lease of a residential property shall not be used to circumvent the
limits placed herein on the number of permitted garage sales on a specific
residential property.
   (E)   The application may require the applicant to provide proof of address
and other relevant information as may be required by the city.
   (F)   An application for a garage sale permit authorizing a self-storage
facility to conduct a property-wide garage sale must be submitted by an
authorized manager, owner, or operator of the facility.
   (G)   An application for a garage sale permit authorizing an apartment
complex to conduct a multi-family garage sale must be submitted by an
authorized manager, owner, or operator of the apartment complex.
   (H)   A garage sale permit application shall be approved or denied within
five days of receipt by the city. The denial of a garage sale permit may be
appealed to the director designated by the City Manager by submitting an appeal
in writing no later than ten business days after the denial of the garage sale
permit application. A decision by the director on a garage sale permit appeal
shall be made within 15 business days of receipt of the appeal.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 95.09 POSSESSION OF PERMIT.
   Each garage sale permit issued shall bear the street address of the
residence or self-storage facility where the sale is located, together with the
date(s) and hours when the garage sale will be conducted. A person conducting a
garage sale must keep a valid garage sale permit on the premises and present
said permit for inspection upon request of any city official.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 95.10 TEMPORARY GARAGE SALE SIGNS.
   (A)   Two temporary signs advertising the garage sale with a maximum size of
four square feet for each sign shall be allowed and the sign shall be located
on the property where the sale is being conducted.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person who is operating, participating in,
or allowing the operation of a garage sale to allow, erect, or cause the
placement of any off-premise advertising signs including, but not limited to,
signs placed on other private property, signs placed within the public right-
of-way, or attached to utility poles, traffic signals or public street sign
posts such as stop signs or speed limit signs.
   (C)   Garage sale signs must be removed by 8:00 a.m. the day following the
last day of the garage sale.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 95.11 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No garage sale shall begin before 7:00 a.m., nor continue after 7:00 p.m.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 95.12 CHARITABLE, RELIGIOUS, EDUCATIONAL, OR NONPROFIT GARAGE SALES.
   The following regulations shall apply to charitable, religious, educational,
fraternal, governmental, or nonprofit organizations (together, nonprofit
organizations):
   (A)   Nonprofit organizations may only conduct a garage sale on the
nonprofit organization’s property or other properties with written permission
regardless of zoning or land use.
   (B)   Regardless of who sponsors the garage sale, a specific individual
location may not conduct more than two garage sales within a calendar year.
   (C)   If a nonprofit organization desires to conduct a garage sale on
property not its own, the nonprofit organization must present to the city a
letter from the owner of the property authorizing the nonprofit organization to
conduct a sale on the property. The letter must include the property address,
the name of the nonprofit organization sponsoring the garage sale and the dates
the garage sale is to take place and must be signed by the property owner.
   (D)   A nonprofit organization is permitted to conduct a maximum of six
garage sales per calendar year.
   (E)   The number of families participating in a garage sale sponsored by a
nonprofit organization is not restricted.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 95.13 NO ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY TO SELL FOOD PRODUCTS.
   (A)   A garage sale permit does not grant any additional authority to sell
food products or prepared food items that would require a mobile food vendor
permit or other food vendor permit to sell.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to conflict with the
exemptions for cottage food production operations in Tex. Health and Safety
Code Ch. 437, as amended.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 95.14 DISPLAY AND SALE OF ITEMS.
   (A)   Garage sale items may be displayed for sale only in the following
areas: residential yard including the front or back yard, garage, patio area,
under a carport covering, driveway, or inside a residence.
   (B)   Garage sale items shall be placed at least ten feet from the roadway
and at least five feet from each side property line.
   (C)   Garage sale items shall not be placed within the public right-of-way.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a person to sell, offer for sale, or display
for sale more than two identical items at a garage sale. For purposes of this
chapter, the meaning of “identical items” shall include matching articles of
clothing in different sizes or identical housewares in different colors. Items
typically sold in sets (such as tableware) are allowed; provided, however, that
whole sets are not offered for sale in multiples exceeding two.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for a person, under the pretense of conducting a
garage sale, to engage in commercial activity on any residential property or
self-storage facility. For the purposes of this chapter, a person is presumed
to be engaging in commercial activity if he or she does any of the following:
      (1)   Displays new/unused items of tangible personal property for sale.
For purposes of this chapter, items for sale are presumed to be new if they are
displayed in their original wrapping or packaging, still have price tags or
sticker affixed to them, or otherwise appear to be of such character that they
appear to have never been used or operated.
      (2)   Displays for sale items of tangible personal property in volumes
exceeding the regular expected number of such personal property items present
at a single-family dwelling. For example, more than two refrigerators,
freezers, washing-machines, etc.
      (3)   Transports large quantities of items to a residential property or
self-storage facility for the purpose of displaying for sale.
   (F)   Garage sale items shall be removed from public view by 8:00 a.m. the
day following the last day of the sale. Garage sale items include, but are not
limited to displays, tables, canopies, racks, tarps, boxes, bins, trash,
leftover sale items, and advertising signs.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 95.15 ENFORCEMENT.
   This chapter may be enforced by any officer or employee of the city as may
be designated by the City Manager to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, association, or
entity to violate any provision of this chapter. Any person who violates a
provision of this chapter commits an offense considered a Class C misdemeanor
and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500. Each day that a violation
of this chapter is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (B)   There shall be no requirement of a culpable mental state for an
offense under this chapter.
('68 Code, § 13½-4) (Ord. passed 12-8-70; Am. Ord. 7-1991-21, passed 7-25-91;
Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
CHAPTER 96: HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
96.01   Definitions
   
96.02   Nuisances enumerated
   
96.03   Tarpaulin use
   
96.04   Water pollution generally
   
96.05   Litter
   
96.06   Dead or diseased brush, vegetation and trees
   
96.07   Defecating or urinating in public places
   
96.08   Sleeping in public places
   
96.09   Leaking fluids
   
96.10   Slaughtering animals prohibited
   
96.11   Hauling dead carcasses
Prohibited Conditions on Private Premises
   
96.30   Conditions prohibited
   
96.31   Duty of owner, occupant and the like
   
96.32   Compliance
   
96.33   Abatement of prohibited conditions
   
96.34   Notice for abating continuing violations
   
96.35   Assessment of expenses - lien
   
96.36   Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds
   
96.37   Maintenance of unimproved property
Junked Vehicles
   
96.45   Junked vehicles
   
96.46   Authority to abate nuisance
   
96.47   Right of entry
   
96.48   Municipal Court authority
   
96.49   Notice of violation
   
96.50   Hearing
   
96.51   Inapplicability of regulations
   
96.52   Abatement of nuisance
   
96.53   Relocation of junked vehicles
   
96.54   Junked vehicle disposal
   
96.55   Junked vehicles not to be made operable after removal
   
96.56   Notice to Department of Transportation
   
96.57   Right of removal from streets preserved
   
96.58   Offense
Residential Property Standards
   
96.65   Outside storage prohibited
   
96.66   Preclusion
   
96.67   Affirmative defenses to prosecution
   
96.68   Membrane structures
Nuisance Personal Property
   
96.75   Certain personal property declared a nuisance
   
96.76   Notice and abatement of nuisance personal property on private property
   
96.77   Notice and abatement of nuisance personal property on public property
   
96.78   Disabled vehicles
   
96.79   Exceptions
 
   
96.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   ABANDONED NUISANCE VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that is at least ten years old
and is of a condition only to be demolished, crushed, or dismantled.
   ALLEY. An unnamed public right-of-way that is designed to serve as utility
access or secondary means of pedestrian or vehicular access to the rear or side
of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street.
   ANTIQUE VEHICLE. A passenger vehicle with a frame, body and motor that is at
least 25 years old. The vehicle is not a replica or aftermarket vehicle and the
vehicle is a collector’s item that can only be used for exhibition, club
activities, parades, and other functions of public interest. The vehicle must
have a current valid antique plate issued by the Texas Department of Motor
Vehicles affixed to the vehicle and shall not be used for daily transportation
except when routine maintenance is needed. The vehicle shall not carry
advertising.
   BANDIT SIGN. Any written, electronic or pictorial form of communication
which is posted, attached or affixed on unauthorized areas to include, but are
not limited to, public property, roadways, railroad right-of-ways, sidewalks,
curbs, public easements, right-of-ways, utility poles, roadway signs, trees,
traffic control devices, fire hydrants, barricades, or private property without
the consent of the owner.
   CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT. Any vehicle, equipment or device designed or
intended for use in construction or material handling including but not limited
to air compressors, pile drivers, pneumatic or hydraulic tools, bulldozers,
tractors, excavators, trenchers, forklifts, cranes, derricks, loaders, skid
steers, track loaders, backhoes, scrapers, pavers, generators, off-highway
haulers or trucks, ditchers, compactors and rollers, pumps, concrete mixers,
graders, scaffolds, other material handling equipment and other like devices.
   CULTIVATED AGRICULTURAL PROPERTY. Property that has been granted an
agricultural use designation by the Johnson County Central Appraisal District
pursuant to the state property tax code and on which a crop is growing that is
recognized by the county agricultural extension office or its successor
designee as a viable crop for the Johnson County area.
   DEGRADABLE. Material that will undergo a process of deterioration or
breaking-up by the action of natural forces such as air, light, water or
microorganisms. DEGRADABLE materials include, but are not limited to food
products, wood, paper, cloth, wool, gypsum, and certain plastics.
   DEMOLISHER. A person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into
processed scrap or scrap metal or to otherwise wreck or dismantle a motor
vehicle.
   DISABLED VEHICLE. A motor vehicle, trailer, recreational vehicle, boat, or
personal watercraft that is:
      (1)   Unregistered, unlicensed, or does not have a valid required vehicle
inspection;
      (2)   Wrecked or dismantled;
      (3)   Inoperative due to mechanical failure, collision, dilapidation; or
      (4)   Incapable of operating safely or legally on a public roadway or
waterway.
   GARAGEKEEPER. An owner or operator of a parking place or establishment,
motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair or
maintenance of a motor vehicle.
   GRAFFITI. Any unauthorized inscription, word, signature, symbol, design, or
other marking of any sort that is etched, written, painted, drawn, or applied
in any other way to any structure, building, tree, vehicle, or property of any
sort, or to any portion or element thereof.
   HEAVY LOAD VEHICLE. A motor vehicle having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating (GVWR) greater than 16,000 pounds, such as large recreational
vehicles, semi-trucks or tractor-trailers, buses, farm or construction
equipment, and other similar motor vehicles.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE. A vehicle that cannot safely and legally be driven upon
public roadways, operated on a waterway or flown for reasons including, but not
limited to, being unlicensed, unregistered, uninspected, wrecked, abandoned, in
a state of disrepair, or incapable of moving under its own power.
   IMPROVED SURFACE. A ground surface covered with an approved material such as
reinforced concrete, asphalt, brick pavers, concrete pavers, or rock and/or
gravel in such a manner as is designed to properly support the gross weight of
the vehicle parked, and prohibit weed growth through the surface and prevent
the seepage of oil, fuel and other vehicle fluids into the ground.
   HOME COMPOSTING. The decomposition, land application and mulching of non-
industrial organic material, such as grass clippings, leaves, brush, clean wood
material or vegetative food material, generated by a homeowner, tenant of a
single- or multi-family residential or apartment complex, or a commercial or
institutional complex where the composting, land application or mulching occurs
on the dwelling property and the final product is utilized on the same
property. HOME COMPOSTING includes neighborhood composting demonstration sites
which generate less than 50 cubic yards of final product per year.
   JUNK. All worn-out, worthless, an discarded material, in general, including
but not limited to old iron or other metal, glass, paper, cordage, or other
waste or discarded materials.
   JUNKED VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle that is self-propelled and:
         (a)   Is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled or discarded; or
         (b)   Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
            1.   Seventy-two consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public
property; or
            2.   Thirty consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private
property.
      (2)   For purpose of this division, JUNKED VEHICLE also includes:
         (a)   An aircraft that does not have lawfully printed on the aircraft
an unexpired federal aircraft identification number registered under Federal
Aviation Administration aircraft registration regulations in 14 C.F.R. Part 47;
and
         (b)   A watercraft that does not have lawfully on board an unexpired
certificate of number and is not a watercraft described by Tex. Parks and
Wildlife Code § 31.055.
   MEMBRANE STRUCTURE. A pressurized or non-pressurized structure supported by
air inflation, cables, ropes or other mechanical means, covered with fabric,
plastic, vinyl, rubber or similar pliable material. Membrane structures may
include, but are not limited to, tents, canopies, temporary carports, portable
garages, air-supported structures, air-inflated or tensioned membrane
structures.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle subject to registration under the Certificate
of Title Act, Tex. Trans. Code § 501.001 et seq.
   MOTOR VEHICLE COLLECTOR. The owner of one or more antique or special
interest vehicles who acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special
interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special
interest vehicle for historic interest.
   NOXIOUS AND INVASIVE PLANTS. Any plant that has a serious potential to cause
economical or ecological harm to the agriculture, horticulture, native plants,
ecology or waterways of Texas. NOXIOUS AND INVASIVE PLANTS shall be those
plants identified by the Texas Department of Agriculture as noxious or invasive
and shall include, but not limited to, Golden Bamboo and other species of
bamboo which are deemed to be invasive to adjoining properties.
   NUISANCE. A thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property which
substantially interferes with the use and enjoyment of another's property or
threatens the health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience, or welfare of the
community.
   PERSON. Any natural person, association of persons, partnership,
corporation, agent, or officer, and shall also include all warehousemen, common
and private carriers, bailees, trustees, receivers, executors, administrators,
parents, and guardians.
   RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Includes off-highway vehicles (OHV), all-terrain
vehicles (ATV), personal watercraft (PWC), side-by-sides (UTV), race cars, drag
cars, drift cars, unlicensed hunting/ranch/farm vehicles, dirt bikes, go carts,
golf carts and other similar vehicles, including crates or trailers used for
transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). A vehicle which is designed as a temporary
dwelling for travel, camping, recreational, seasonal or vacation use, and is
either self-propelled, mounted on, or pulled by another vehicle. Examples
include but are not limited to a travel trailer, camping trailer, truck
camper, popup camper, motor home, motor coaches, tent trailers, fifth-wheel
trailer, or camper van. The exterior length of a recreational vehicle shall be
the greatest distance measured from the front exterior wall or bumper of the
vehicle to the rear exterior wall or bumper of the vehicle.
   REFUSE. All waste materials defined as garbage or rubbish by the IPMC.
   SPECIAL INTEREST VEHICLE. A motor vehicle of any age that has not been
changed from original manufacturer’s specifications and, because of its
historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist.
   TARPAULIN (TARP). A protective covering made of plastic, or other waterproof
material used to overlay and protect items from moisture.
   TRAILER. A vehicle with wheels, with or without cargo, that is not self-
propelled. Trailers shall include, but are not limited to, cargo trailer, boat
trailer, livestock trailer, horse trailer, utility trailer, semi-trailer,
equipment trailer, vehicle hauling trailer, and dump trailer, excluding
recreational vehicles.
   VEHICLE. A device in or by which a person or property is or may be
transported or drawn on a public highway, other than a device used exclusively
on stationary rails or tracks.
   WATERCRAFT. A vessel subject to registration under Tex. Parks and Wildlife
Code § 31.01 et seq.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 96.02 NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   The following specific acts, conditions, and objects are declared to
constitute a nuisance and are hereby prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to create, cause, conduct, maintain, or permit any nuisance within the
jurisdiction of the city. The jurisdiction for the enforcement and abatement of
nuisance violations shall include the corporate city limits and all areas
within 5,000 feet of the corporate city limits:
   (A)   Any public nuisance known at common law or equity;
   (B)   Render air, food, or drink unwholesome or detrimental to health,
safety, and welfare of the public;
   (C)   Any noxious or unreasonable odor created by chemicals, decomposing
organic matter, or confined animal feeding operations;
   (D)   Throw, place, or deposit in any well, cistern, tank, fountain, spring,
lake, waterway, or any other place containing water, any substance or liquid
that may pollute, poison, or render unwholesome the water therein;
   (E)   Keep, store, or maintain a disabled or junked vehicle in violation of
this code;
   (F)   Obstruct a street or sidewalk by trees, hedges, or shrubs defined in §
99.07 of this code;
   (G)   Keep, store, or accumulate refuse on premises unless the refuse is
entirely contained in a closed receptacle;
   (H)   Keep, store, or accumulate rubbish, appliances, furniture, tires,
lumber, vehicle parts, construction material, cans, or barrels on premises
unless the rubbish or object is stored in a completely enclosed building;
   (I)   Allow or permit any carrion, filth, manure, or any other impure,
unsanitary, or unwholesome matter of any kind to accumulate or remain on
premises;
   (J)   Maintain premises in a manner that creates an unsanitary condition
likely to attract or harbor mosquitoes, rodents, vermin, or other disease-
carrying pests;
   (K)   Create or maintain an attractive nuisance, which may be detrimental to
children, whether in a building, on the premises, or upon an unoccupied lot.
This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements, septic tanks, or
excavations; abandoned refrigerators or motor vehicles; or any lumber, trash,
debris, or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors;
   (L)   Maintain a property with excessive weed or plant growth;
   (M)   Growth of noxious and invasive plants;
   (N)   Diseased or dead trees constituting a hazard to safety, health, or
public welfare;
   (O)   Maintain a building in a manner that is structurally unsafe or
constitutes a hazard to safety, health, or public welfare because of inadequate
maintenance, unsanitary conditions, dilapidation, obsolescence, disaster,
damage, or abandonment or because it constitutes a fire hazard;
   (P)   Overcrowd a dwelling with occupants;
   (Q)   Damage or create a defective sidewalk on a public right-of-way;
   (R)   A structure, basin chamber, pool or tank located indoors or outdoors
containing an artificial body of water intended to be used for swimming, diving
or recreational bathing, including spas or hot tubs, which becomes unfit to be
used for the purpose intended;
   (S)   Create or maintain on any property, a swimming pool, spa or hot tub
that does not comply with the most currently adopted International Property
Maintenance Code;
   (T)   Maintain a flea market in a manner that constitutes a fire hazard;
   (U)   Fill or block a drainage easement, fail to maintain a drainage
easement, maintain a drainage easement in a manner that allows the easement to
be clogged with debris, sediment, or vegetation, or violate an agreement with
the city to improve or maintain a drainage easement;
   (V)   Drill or operate a water well in violation of Tex. Water Code;
   (W)   Discard refuse on property not authorized for that activity;
   (X)   The presence of ectoparasites, including bedbugs, lice, and mites,
suspected to be disease carriers in a place in which sleeping accommodations
are offered to the public;
   (Y)   A condition or place in a populous area that is a breeding place for
flies;
   (Z)   Spoiled, diseased, decayed, harmfully adulterated, or unwholesome food
or drink sold or offered for sale to the public;
   (AA)   A restaurant, food market, bakery, other place of business, or
vehicle in which food is prepared, packed, stored, transported, sold, or served
to the public and that is not constantly maintained in a sanitary condition;
   (BB)   Sewage, human excreta, wastewater, garbage, or other organic wastes
deposited, stored, discharged, or exposed in such a way as to be a potential
instrument or medium in disease transmission to a person or between persons.
Home composting in compliance with Tex. Admin. Code Rule 332.4 is permitted;
   (CC)   An object, place, or condition that is a possible and probable medium
of disease transmission to or between humans;
   (DD)   A defective vehicle or container used to transport garbage, human
excreta, or other organic material and causes leakage or spilling of contents;
   (EE)   A collection of water in which mosquitoes are breeding or a
collection of water that is a breeding area for mosquitoes that can transmit
diseases regardless of the collection’s location other than a location or
property where activities meeting the definition of Tex. Water Code § 11.002
(12)(A) occur;
   (FF)   Nuisance personal property as defined in §
96.75 of this code.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 96.03 TARPAULIN USE.
   (A)   Tarpaulins used for covering a vehicle, boat, trailer or other item
and visible from the public right-of-way shall not be torn, defective or worn
and shall be fitted and manufactured for the vehicle or item covered.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize a tarpaulin, which is
visible from the public right- of-way, on a building or structure for a period
longer than 30 days.
   (C)   Tarpaulins may be used for temporary screening purposes but shall not
remain in place longer than 72 hours in any 30-day period.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.04 WATER POLLUTION GENERALLY.
   The City Council finds and determines that:
      (1)   The city operates and maintains a storm sewer system in the city,
and the water from such storm system is discharged into the Brazos River
Watershed;
      (2)   The city has been charged by the Texas Water Quality Board with the
responsibility for abatement of water pollution in streams and watercourses
within the jurisdiction of the city and the city finds it necessary to control
such material and substances that will adversely affect the quality of effluent
waters being discharged to the Brazos Watershed; and
      (3)   The city has determined that certain substances and materials are
contributing pollutant to the Brazos River Watershed and other adequate means
are available for the proper disposal of such materials and substances.
   (B)   The City Council finds that the following acts will adversely affect
the quality of water in the storm drainage system and watercourses within the
jurisdiction of the city, and it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to create, cause, conduct, maintain, or permit any of the acts
listed below:
      (1)   Dump grass clippings, leaves, brush, or any debris to curb, gutter,
storm inlet, storm drain, or watercourse is prohibited;
      (2)   Allow crankcase drainings, vehicle engine wash, or other oils,
greases, or like material to drain to the storm system or watercourses;
      (3)   Allow liquid, semi-liquid, or chemical waste to be deposited in an
area that will drain to the storm system or watercourses;
      (4)   Allow grease and sand traps from automotive centers, service
stations, and vehicle wash operations to be connected to or to drain to the
sanitary sewer, storm system, or watercourses;
      (5)   Allow effluent from vehicle wash operations of bus and truck lines
operating more than two vehicles to be trapped and placed or drained to the
sanitary sewer, storm system, or watercourses in violation of the city’s
Plumbing Code;
      (6)   Allow effluent from aircraft washing to be trapped and placed or
drained to the sanitary sewer, storm system, or watercourses in violation of
the city’s Plumbing Code;
      (7)   Allow cooling tower, compressor, or boiler blowdown water that is
not clean water to flow or drain to the storm system or watercourses;
      (8)   Allow water from nurseries to flow to streets or alleys to the
extent that it causes standing water, damage to streets or alleys, or
interference with the free passage of foot traffic;
      (9)   Allow animal pens from a kennel, animal hospital, parking house,
poultry processing plant, or dairy to connect or drain to the sanitary sewer,
storm system, or watercourses in violation of the city’s Plumbing Code;
      (10)   Dump ready-mixed concrete, mortar, or asphalt base material in or
on any area that will drain to the storm drainage system, watercourses, or
streams;
      (11)   Alter, obstruct or maintain a drainage easement in a manner that
prevents the easement from functioning as originally constructed. This includes
the placement of fill, storage of material, deposition of debris or vegetation,
and allowing growth of excessive vegetation;
      (12)   Fail to control the discharge of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and
other material produced by commercial or industrial processes or the clearing,
grading, excavation, or other construction activities, from migrating to
adjacent properties or entering the watercourses, streams or storm drainage
system;
      (13)   Divert or impound the natural flow of surface waters in a manner
that damages the property of another by the overflow of the water diverted or
impounded.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 04-2020-24, passed 4-14- 20; Am.
Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 96.05 LITTER.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to place litter in a public
receptacle or in an authorized private receptacle in such a manner as to allow
the liter to be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk,
or other public place or upon private property.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person to throw or deposit, or caused to be
thrown or deposited, any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any
sidewalk, street, or other public place.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a person to throw out, drop, or deposit, or
cause to be thrown out, dropped, or deposited, from any aircraft any litter,
handbill, or any other object upon any public or private property.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.06 DEAD OR DISEASED BRUSH, VEGETATION AND TREES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a property owner or manager to permit dead or
diseased brush, vegetation or trees to remain on a premise or property. The
city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased brush,
vegetation or tree on private property.
   (B)   If a dead or diseased tree constitutes a hazard to life and/or
property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to
other trees within the jurisdiction of the city, the city may order the
immediate removal of the tree or cause the tree to be removed and charge the
cost of the removal to the property owner.
   (C)   Premises and property shall include all areas, easements and rights-
of-way adjacent to private real property and situated between the private real
property and the edge of an improved roadway, drainage channel, or adjacent
alley.
   (D)   Compliance and notice will be in accordance with §§
96.32 and
96.33 of this code.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 96.07 DEFECATING OR URINATING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to defecate or urinate upon any street,
alley, park, or any public grounds or upon any place visible from any public
grounds.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.08 SLEEPING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   Except where specifically allowed by city ordinance, it shall be unlawful
for a person to sleep upon public grounds. It shall be unlawful for a person to
lay or sleep on any alley, street, or sidewalk.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.09 LEAKING FLUIDS.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to allow any liquid, other than clean
water, to be dropped, to fall, or to leak from any vehicle upon any street,
alley, or other public way or upon the private property of any person without
his effective consent.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.10 SLAUGHTERING ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The slaughter or butcher of an animal or fowl must not be in public
view.
   (B)   To prevent odor and attraction of scavengers or pests, all waste
material produced from the slaughter or butcher of an animals, fish or fowl
(blood, hide, pelt, skin, feathers, entrails, scales, bones, feet, head,
carcass, etc.) must be placed in sealable containers or double bagged in
plastic bags of sufficient size and strength to contain the waste material.
   (C)   Waste material from the slaughter or butcher of animals, fish or fowl
shall not be stored in public view and shall be disposed of per city ordinance.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.11 HAULING DEAD CARCASSES.
   It shall be unlawful to haul, carry, or transport any slaughtered or dead
animals or meat on, along, or upon any street, alley, highway, park, or other
public grounds within the jurisdiction of the city without having the same
covered and protected from public view and screened from insects, germs, and
dust.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
PROHIBITED CONDITIONS ON PRIVATE PREMISES
§ 96.30 CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for a person, firm, or corporation owning, occupying,
or having control of property within the jurisdiction of the city, whether
occupied or unoccupied, to permit the following conditions on said property:
   (A)   To allow graffiti that is visible from public view or any private
property other than that on which the same exists;
   (B)   To allow toilet facilities which are accessible to the public or
employees in a business to become foul, nauseous or offensive, or neglect or
fail to abate the foul, nauseous or offensive condition by cleaning,
disinfecting or other proper action, as may be ordered by the city;
   (C)   To allow, keep, or operate, or suffer or permit to exist, any
slaughter house, butcher pen, or other place where animals, fowls, or birds are
slaughtered or killed on any premises not zoned for such use;
   (D)   To allow or to burn in the open hair, leather, rags, or any other
substance that emits an offensive, unhealthful, or annoying smell, smoke, or
odor.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.31 DUTY OF OWNER, OCCUPANT AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   It is the duty of a person, firm, or corporation owning, occupying, or
having control of property within the jurisdiction of the city to prevent or to
remove, or cause to be removed, any of the conditions described in §§
96.02 through
96.30 of this chapter.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to natural waterways maintained by the
city.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.32 COMPLIANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to maintain any
property within the jurisdiction of the city, in violation of §§
96.02 through
96.30 of this chapter. When the city is made aware of a violation of this
section, the city may, simultaneously and without limitation, pursue one or
more of the following remedies:
   (A)   Work with the violator to resolve the matter;
   (B)   Issue a citation before or after taking action or providing notice to
abate the violation; or
   (C)   Pursue the abatement of the violation by following the procedures set
forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.33 ABATEMENT OF PROHIBITED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   If the owner of property within the jurisdiction of the city does not
comply with §
96.31 of this chapter, the city may give notice to the owner to remove the
violation on the property within a fixed period of time.
   (B)   The notice must be given:
      (1)   Personally to the owner in writing;
      (2)   By letter, sent certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed
to the owner at the owner’s address as recorded in the appraisal district
records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or
      (3)   If service cannot be made personally or by certified mail:
         (a)   By publication at least once;
         (b)   By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building
on the property to which the violation relates; or
         (c)   By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven
into the ground on the property to which the violation relates.
   (C)   If the city mails a notice in accordance with division (B)(2), and the
United States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,”
the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as
delivered.
   (D)   If the owner of property within the jurisdiction of the city does not
remove the violation on the property within seven days of notice of a
violation, the city may abate the violation or make the improvements required
and pay for the abatement and/or work and charge the expenses to the owner of
the property.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 96.34 NOTICE FOR ABATING CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   In a notice provided under §
96.33 of this chapter, the city may inform the owner by regular mail and a
posting on the property, or by personal delivery of the notice, that if the
owner commits another violation of this chapter of the same kind or nature on
or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city, without
further notice, may abate the violation at the owner's expense and assess the
expense against the property.
   (B)   If a violation covered by a notice under this section occurs within
the one-year period and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner
of an ownership change, then the city, without notice, may take any action
permitted by §
96.33(D) of this chapter and assess its expenses as provided by §
96.35 of this chapter.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.35 ASSESSMENT OF EXPENSES - LIEN.
   (A)   The city may assess the expenses incurred under §
96.33(D) against the real property on which the work is done or improvements
made.
   (B)   The city shall first send a notice of the expenses to the owner of the
property on which the work is done or improvements made. The notice must:
      (1)   Identify the property on which the work was done or improvements
made;
      (2)   Describe the violation that existed on the property;
      (3)   A statement that the city abated the violation;
      (4)   A statement of the amount of the city's expenses for the work done
or improvements made. Expenses shall include a nuisance abatement fee of $100;
      (5)   A statement advising the owner of the right to request a hearing on
the validity of the expenses for the work done or improvements made; and
      (6)   A statement that if the owner fails or refuses to pay the expenses
within 30 days after the first day of the month following the month in which
the work was done or the improvements were made, the city shall obtain a lien
against the property by filing with the county clerk of Johnson County a notice
of lien and statement of expenses.
   (C)   The owner of the property shall be entitled to a hearing before the
City Manager or his designee to review the validity of the expenses if the
owner requests a hearing by filing a written request with the City Manager
within ten days of the owner's receipt of the notice of the expenses.
   (D)   If the owner of the property properly requests a hearing, the City
Manager or his designee shall conduct a hearing within ten days of receipt of
the request. At the hearing, the City Manager or his designee shall allow the
owner of the property, city staff, and any other person that the City Manager
or his designee determines may have testimony that will assist in reviewing the
validity of the expenses to testify. The City Manager or his designee may
affirm or modify the expenses based on the evidence presented at the hearing.
   (E)   If no hearing is requested, or a hearing is held and the expenses are
determined to be valid after the hearing, the owner shall pay the expenses
within 30 days after the first day of the month following the month in which
the work was done or the improvements were made.
   (F)   If the owner fails or refuses to pay the expenses as required by
division (E), the city shall have a lien on the property upon the filing of a
notice of lien and statement of expenses with the County Clerk of Johnson
County. The lien attaches upon the filing of the notice of lien and statement
of expenses with the County Clerk. A notice of lien and statement of expenses
must state the name of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the
property. A signature on a notice of lien and statement of expenses may be a
facsimile signature as defined in Tex. Gov't Code § 618.002.
   (G)   The lien obtained by the city is security for the expenditures made
and interest accruing at the annual rate of 10% on the amount due from the date
of payment by the city. Expenditures shall include an administrative fee of
$100 plus nuisance abatement fee, court/record filing fees, and other actual
expenses for each abatement performed on each individual lot or parcel of land.
The lien is inferior only to tax liens and liens for street improvements.
   (H)   The governing body of the city may bring a suit for foreclosure in the
name of the city to recover the expenditures and interest due. The original
notice of lien and statement of expenses or a certified copy of the same is
prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by the city in doing the work or
making the improvements.
   (I)   The assessment of expenses and enforcement of a lien under this
section is in addition to the city's remedy of issuing a citation or
prosecuting for an offense under §§
96.32 or
96.99 of this chapter.
   (J)   The city may foreclose a lien on property under this section in a
proceeding relating to the property brought under Tex. Tax Code Ch.33, Subch.
E, pursuant to Tex. Health and Safety Code § 342.007.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.36 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY TO ABATE DANGEROUS WEEDS.
   (A)   The city may immediately abate, without notice, weeds that:
      (1)   Have grown higher than 48 inches; and
      (2)   Are an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any
person.
   (B)   Not later than the tenth day after the date the city abates weeds
under this section, the city shall give notice to the owner of the property
from which the weeds were abated in the manner required by §
96.33 of this chapter.
   (C)   The notice shall contain:
      (1)   An identification, which is not required to be a legal description,
of the property;
      (2)   A description of the violation of the ordinance that occurred on
the property;
      (3)   A statement that the city abated the weeds; and
      (4)   An explanation of the property owner's right to request an
administrative hearing about the city's abatement of the weeds.
   (D)   The city shall conduct an administrative hearing on the abatement of
the weeds under this section if, not later than the thirtieth day after the
date of the abatement of the weeds, the owner of the property files a written
request for a hearing with the City Manager.
   (E)   An administrative hearing conducted under this section shall be
conducted by the City Manager or his designee not later than the twentieth day
after the date a request for a hearing is filed. The owner may testify or
present any witnesses or written information relating to the city's abatement
of the weeds.
   (F)   The city may assess expenses and create liens under this section as it
assesses expenses and creates liens under §
96.35 of this chapter. A lien created under this section is subject to the same
conditions as a lien created under §
96.35 of this chapter.
   (G)   The authority of the city under this section is in addition to the
authority granted in §
96.33 of this chapter.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.37 MAINTENANCE OF UNIMPROVED PROPERTY.
   (A)   With the exception of cultivated crops, trees or brush, a person,
firm, or corporation owning, occupying, or controlling unimproved property
shall not allow weeds or plants to grow to a height greater than eight inches
within 50 feet of a roadway, sidewalk or an adjacent property with an
improvement. Noxious weeds shall be prohibited on unimproved property.
   (B)   A person, firm, or corporation owning, occupying, or controlling
unimproved property shall not allow brush or shrubs to grow within ten feet of
a curb line, edge of a roadway or adjacent property with an improvement. Limbs
on trees within the ten-foot barrier of an adjacent property line must be
pruned to a height of eight feet above the ground.
   (C)   A person, firm, or corporation owning, occupying, or controlling
cultivated agricultural property within the jurisdiction of the city used for
growing crops must maintain the property as follows:
      (1)   Crops may not be allowed to grow in an area within ten feet of a
curb line, edge of a roadway, sidewalk or an adjacent property under different
ownership;
      (2)   When a property is not actively growing cultivated crops, all
vegetation must be harvested, cut, baled, shredded or plowed to comply with
division (A).
   (D)   A person, firm, or corporation owning, occupying, or controlling
cultivated agricultural property shall not:
      (1)   Allow vegetation between the growing crop and an adjacent property
with a structure or improvement to grow to a height greater than eight inches;
      (2)   Allow the growing crop to interfere with visibility, access, or
maintenance at any intersection of public thoroughfares within the jurisdiction
of the city; or
      (3)   Allow the vegetation around the perimeter of the property, which is
not a part of the growing crop, to grow to a height greater than eight inches.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
JUNKED VEHICLES
§ 96.45 JUNKED VEHICLES.
   A junked vehicle, including any part of a junked vehicle, is detrimental to
the safety and welfare of the public and is declared a public nuisance and it
shall be unlawful for any person to create, cause, maintain or permit a junked
vehicle to remain outside an enclosed building within the jurisdiction of the
city.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 96.46 AUTHORITY TO ABATE NUISANCE.
   The city, acting through the City Manager or his representative, is
authorized to abate and remove a junked vehicle or part of a junked vehicle
from private or public property as a public nuisance in accordance with the
junked vehicle regulations in this chapter.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 96.47 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The City Manager or his representative may enter upon private property to
examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of the
vehicles, and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof
declared to be a junked vehicle to accomplish the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.48 MUNICIPAL COURT AUTHORITY.
   The Municipal Court of the city shall have authority to take all actions
necessary to enforce the abatement procedures for junked vehicles and to issue
all orders necessary to enforce the provisions in this chapter concerning
junked vehicles. The Judge of the Municipal Court of the city shall conduct all
hearings necessary for the application and enforcement of this division.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.49 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Prior to any action being taken to abate and remove a junked vehicle,
a notice must be personally delivered, sent by certified mail with a return
receipt requested, or delivered by the United States Postal Service with
signature confirmation service to:
      (1)   The last known registered owner of the nuisance;
      (2)   Each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and
      (3)   The owner or occupant of the property on which the nuisance is
located.
   (B)   Notice requirements:
      (1)   Describe the nature of the nuisance;
      (2)   State that the nuisance must be abated or removed not later than
the tenth day after the date on which the notice was personally delivered or
mailed;
      (3)   State that the addressee is entitled to a public hearing if a
request for a public hearing is made before the expiration of the ten day
notice to abate or remove; and
      (4)   State that in the event that no request for hearing is received
before the expiration of the ten day notice to abate or remove or that the
persons entitled to notice failed to attend a requested hearing, it shall be
conclusively presumed the vehicle is a junked vehicle as defined under state
law and this chapter.
   (C)   If a person who receives a notice under this section desires a
hearing, the person must file a request for hearing in writing with the
municipal court not later than the tenth day after the date on which the notice
to abate or remove was personally delivered or mailed. The request for hearing
must include:
      (1)   The name of the person filing the request;
      (2)   A description of the nuisance; and
      (3)   State that a hearing is requested under this section.
   (D)   If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the
nuisance is unknown, notice under this section may be placed on the nuisance
or, if the owner is located, personally delivered.
   (E)   If the notice to abate or remove mailed in accordance with this
section is returned undelivered, action to abate or remove the nuisance shall
be continued to a date not earlier than the eleventh day after the date of the
return.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 96.50 HEARING.
   (A)   If a hearing is requested under §
96.49 of this chapter, a public hearing, to be conducted by the municipal court
judge, shall be held in the municipal court of the city to determine whether a
public nuisance exists.
   (B)   The hearing shall not be held prior to the eleventh day after the date
on which the notice to abate or remove under §
96.49 of this chapter was personally delivered or mailed.
   (C)   At a hearing under this section, any interested person may present
evidence. The municipal court judge shall consider all relevant evidence
presented at the hearing to determine whether the alleged nuisance meets the
definition of junked vehicle under this chapter.
   (D)   At a hearing under this section, the alleged nuisance is presumed to
be inoperable, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner or other interested
person.
   (E)   If the municipal court finds that the alleged nuisance is not a junked
vehicle, the municipal court judge shall make a written order that there is not
cause for abatement at the time of the order. An order that there is not cause
for abatement at the time of the order does not bar a future action for
abatement of the same motor vehicle, aircraft, boat, or personal watercraft as
a junked vehicle.
   (F)   If the municipal court judge finds that the alleged nuisance is a
junked vehicle, the municipal court judge shall make a written order that the
motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, or part thereof be abated or removed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter concerning junked vehicles.
   (G)   If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, any
order requiring removal of the nuisance must include:
      (1)   For a motor vehicle, the vehicle’s:
         (a)   Description;
         (b)   Vehicle identification number; and
         (c)   License plate number;
      (2)   For an aircraft, the aircraft’s:
         (a)   Description; and
         (b)   Federal aircraft identification number as described by Federal
Aviation Administration aircraft registration regulations in 14 C.F.R. Part 47;
and
      (3)   For a boat or personal watercraft, the boat or personal
watercraft’s:
         (a)   Description; and
         (b)   Identification number as set forth in the boat or personal
watercraft’s certificate of number.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 96.51 INAPPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter concerning junked vehicles do not apply to a
vehicle or vehicle part:
   (A)   That is stored or parked inside an enclosed building in a lawful
manner; or
   (B)   That is stored or parked outside an enclosed building in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
vehicle dealer, licensed vehicle storage facility or junkyard provided:
      (1)   The outside storage area has an improved surface and maintained
free from vegetation;
      (2)   The outside storage area is maintained in an orderly manner;
      (3)   The outside storage area is not a health hazard; and
      (4)   If the vehicle is wrecked, dismantled, or partially dismantled it
shall be screened from view by an approved fence.
   (C)   That is a special interest vehicle stored or parked outside an
enclosed building by a motor vehicle collector on the collector’s property,
provided the outside storage area:
      (1)   Has an improved surface and maintained free from vegetation;
      (2)   Is maintained in an orderly manner;
      (3)   Is not a health hazard;
      (4)   Is parked or stored at least 36 inches from any adjacent property
line; and
      (5)   Is screened from view by an approved fence.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 96.52 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   Upon the expiration of the ten-day notice period without a request for
hearing being filed or upon receipt of a written order from the municipal court
after a hearing required by §
96.50 of this chapter, the City Manager or his representative may cause the
junked vehicle or part of the junked vehicle to be abated by removal and
disposal as provided for in §
96.54 of this chapter by any authorized person.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.53 RELOCATION OF JUNKED VEHICLES.
   The relocation of the junked vehicle or part of a junked vehicle that is a
public nuisance to another location within the jurisdiction of the city, after
a proceeding for the abatement and removal of the public nuisance has
commenced, has no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle or part of a
junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.54 JUNKED VEHICLE DISPOSAL.
   A junked vehicle removed by the city pursuant to this subchapter shall be
removed to a scrapyard, a motor vehicle demolisher, or a suitable site operated
by a municipality or county.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.55 JUNKED VEHICLES NOT TO BE MADE OPERABLE AFTER REMOVAL.
   After any junked vehicle has been removed under the authority in §
96.52 of this chapter, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable again.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.56 NOTICE TO DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION.
      Not later than the fifth day after the date of removal of a junked
vehicle pursuant to this chapter, notice identifying the junked vehicle or part
of the junked vehicle removed must be given to the State Department of
Transportation.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.57 RIGHT OF REMOVAL FROM STREETS PRESERVED.
   Nothing in this chapter shall affect a law authorizing the immediate removal
of a vehicle left on public property that is an obstruction of traffic.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.58 OFFENSE.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance
described by §
96.45 of this chapter. Each day that a person maintains the public nuisance
shall be a separate offense.
   (B)   An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a
fine as set forth in §
10.99 of this code.
   (C)   The court shall order abatement and removal of the nuisance upon
conviction for an offense under this section.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY STANDARDS
§ 96.65 OUTSIDE STORAGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to openly store any item prohibited
in division (B) in an area within the front yard or side yard that is visible a
public right-of-way or public easement for more than 24 hours on any property
within a residentially zoned district or on property used primarily for
residential purposes, including multifamily property.
   (B)   Open visible storage of the following items is prohibited:
      (1)   Merchandise for sale;
      (2)   Building materials;
      (3)   Trash bags;
      (4)   Inventory or supplies for a business;
      (5)   Chemicals and supplies;
      (6)   Firewood;
      (7)   Furniture, barbeque grills, smokers, ice chests, and pet kennels;
      (8)   Appliances and other items not designed or intended for outdoor
use;
      (9)   Lawnmowers and other lawn care equipment;
      (10)   Tools;
      (11)   Boxes, bins, barrels, and buckets;
      (12)   Motor vehicle parts and accessories; including, but not limited
to, engines, transmissions, electrical equipment, suspension parts, tires,
hubcaps, and other motor vehicle parts; and
      (13)   Unattended motor vehicles stored on jack stands or otherwise
lifted from the ground or surface.
   (C)   With the exception of firewood for personal use and activities
identified in §
96.67, outdoor storage of degradable material is prohibited.
   (D)   Outdoor storage of firewood and non-degradable material is permitted
if the material is not visible from a public right-of-way or public easement
and materials are arranged into storage piles that do not create a health,
safety, fire, egress or access hazard and the storage piles are:
      (1)   Six feet or less in width;
      (2)   Six feet or less in height;
      (3)   Twenty-five feet or less in length;
      (4)   Three or more feet from any fence or adjoining property line;
      (5)   Three or more feet from an adjacent storage pile;
      (6)   Three or more feet from a shrub, bush, brush or the base of a tree;
and
      (7)   Three or more feet from structures.
   (E)   Outdoor storage of material does not include outdoor furniture,
fixtures or recreational items.
   (F)   Areas around and under outdoor storage of material shall be kept free
and clear of accumulation of grass, weeds, brush or other uncultivated
vegetation.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.66 PRECLUSION.
   Nothing in §
96.65 of this chapter shall preclude the city from enforcing any nuisance,
health and safety, or fire code violations that are screened from public view
or exist anywhere on a property.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.67   AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO PROSECUTION.
   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution for a violation of §
96.65(B) of this chapter for items or materials which:
   (A)   Are stored to conduct a properly permitted garage sale;
   (B)   Are necessary for properly permitted construction or demolition work
performed on the property. Materials stored for work not requiring a building
permit shall be stored no longer than ten consecutive days within any six-month
period;
   (C)   Are routinely used, are not damaged or inoperable, and are not visible
from a public right-of-way or public easement;
   (D)   Are a barbecue grill or smoker and is actively being used or is
mounted to an attached trailer which is licensed and is capable of being
operated on a public roadway. A smoker or grill on a trailer shall be stored on
an improved surface.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 96.68 MEMBRANE STRUCTURES.
   It is unlawful for any person, without a permit, to erect, maintain, or
permit the use of a membrane structure on any property within the city for a
period of more than 72 consecutive hours or as authorized for temporary use in
association with a permitted project on the property. Any membrane structure so
authorized must be removed immediately upon conclusion of the project. Except
for membrane structures erected on an authorized project, membrane structures
shall not be erected or maintained on any property within the city exceeding a
cumulative time of 21 days within a calendar year. Membrane structures
exceeding 400 square feet in area shall comply with the requirements of the
International Building Code and International Fire Code. Permanent accessory
structures shall comply with
Ch. 155 of this code.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
NUISANCE PERSONAL PROPERTY
§ 96.75 CERTAIN PERSONAL PROPERTY DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   (A)   Any personal property left unattended in or upon any public street,
alley, sidewalk, park, or other public property within the jurisdiction of the
city for more than 48 hours is hereby declared a nuisance.
   (B)   Any personal property or obstruction placed, left standing, erected,
or lying in violation of any ordinance of the city is hereby declared a
nuisance.
   (C)   Any personal property or obstruction placed, left standing, erected,
or lying on private property without consent of the owner, occupant, or person
otherwise in control of the premises on which the same is located is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
   (D)   A disabled vehicle stored or parked outside an enclosed building is
hereby declared a nuisance.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 96.76 NOTICE AND ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE PERSONAL PROPERTY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   When personal property is discovered on private property in violation
of §
96.75(B) or (C) of this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer shall give notice
of the nuisance by mailing notice of the violation to the record owner of the
property where the nuisance is located at the address recorded in the appraisal
district records for the Appraisal District in which the property is located.
   (B)   The notice under division (A) shall:
      (1)   Describe the nuisance;
      (2)   Advise that if the nuisance is not removed within 48 hours of the
delivery of the notice the city will abate the nuisance; and
      (3)   Advise that the notice is considered delivered three days after the
date the notice was mailed.
   (C)   A notice under this section is considered delivered three days after
the notice is placed in the United States Mail addressed as required by
division (B).
   (D)   If a nuisance remains on private property 48 hours after the notice
under this section is delivered, the city shall have authority to enter the
private property where the nuisance is located and abate the nuisance.
   (E)   Upon abatement of the nuisance, the nuisance personal property shall
be disposed of by delivering the personal property to the city's Waste
Management Department or to an entity with which the city contracts for waste
management services.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.77 NOTICE AND ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE PERSONAL PROPERTY ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   When personal property is discovered on public property in violation
of §
96.75(A) of this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer shall give notice of the
nuisance by posting notice of the violation on the nuisance personal property
or by posting the notice of the violation on a stake in a place as close as
practicable to the nuisance personal property.
   (B)   The notice under division (A) shall:
      (1)   Describe the nuisance;
      (2)   State the date the notice was posted; and
      (3)   Advise that if the nuisance is not removed within 48 hours of the
date the notice is posted the city will abate the nuisance.
   (C)   If nuisance personal property remains on public property 48 hours
after the notice under this section is posted, the city shall have authority to
abate the nuisance.
   (D)   Upon abatement of the nuisance, the nuisance personal property shall
be disposed of by delivering the personal property to the city's Waste
Management Department or to an entity with which the city contracts for waste
management services.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 96.78 DISABLED VEHICLES.
   (A)   A disabled vehicle is subject to removal by the city without notice if
the vehicle is:
      (1)   Obstructing a roadway, right-of-way, easement, alley or sidewalk;
      (2)   Parked or stored on private property without the consent of the
property owner; or
      (3)   Parked or stored on public property for more than 48 hours.
   (B)   A disabled vehicle stored or parked for more than 30 days outside an
enclosed building on private property is subject to removal by the city. The
city shall provide notice stating the vehicle has been deemed a disabled
vehicle and may be removed by the city unless the vehicle is:
      (1)   Removed;
      (2)   Repaired, registered, and made operable; or
      (3)   Moved inside an enclosed building.
   (C)   The notice shall have the date the notice was posted or mailed and
shall be:
      (1)   Posted on the vehicle;
      (2)   Personally delivered to property owner or tenant of the property
where the vehicle is located; or
      (3)   Mailed, return receipt requested, to the property owner or tenant
of the property where the vehicle is located.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 96.79 EXCEPTIONS.
   These regulations concerning nuisance personal property shall not apply to:
   (A)   Motor vehicles, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats, or personal
watercraft parked or stored at a licensed vehicle dealer or licensed vehicle
storage facility, provided if such vehicles are dilapidated, wrecked,
dismantled, or partially dismantled, the storage of motor vehicles, trailers,
recreational vehicles, boats, and personal watercraft shall comply with the
provisions of §
96.51(B);
   (B)   Motor vehicles, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats, or personal
watercraft parked or stored outside an enclosed building on the property of an
automotive, recreational vehicle, boat, or personal watercraft repair shop
provided a motor vehicle, trailer, recreational vehicle, boat, or personal
watercraft may not be stored or parked outside of an enclosed building for more
than 90 days;
   (C)   Motor vehicles, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats, or personal
watercraft parked or stored outside an enclosed building on the property of a
licensed automotive wrecking or salvage yard provided the wrecking or salvage
yard is in compliance with all local and state laws;
   (D)   Not more than two whole or partial vehicles used as supplementary
signage or ornamentation for a business having a certificate of occupancy in a
Commercial C zoning district, provided that the vehicles or vehicle parts used
are installed and maintained in a manner that secures them from operation or
from rolling, moving, or dislodging under the same conditions as a traditional
sign. While it is recognized that vehicles used in this manner may be historic
or vintage and may display some amount of age and wear, any vehicle or partial
vehicle authorized under this chapter shall be maintained to prevent further
deterioration after installation, including preventing the growth of rust, rot,
fading, cracking, or other forms of visual decay;
   (E)   Property that the possession, use, sale manufacture, transportation,
repair, or delivery of which is prohibited by law;
   (F)   Property which is regulated by the Police Department; or
   (G)   Weapons as defined in the Texas Penal Code.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   It is an offense for a person, firm, or corporation to violate, disobey,
omit, neglect, refuse to comply with, or resist the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. An offense under this section is a Class C
misdemeanor. Any offense for which no other penalty is set forth in this
chapter shall be subject to the penalty set forth in §
10.99 of this code.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
CHAPTER 97: LIBRARY
Section
General Provisions
   
97.01   Fines and charges
   
97.02   Intentional damage to property
   
97.03   Unlawful retention of property
Library Board
   
97.15   Created; composition; appointment and terms of members
   
97.16   Members not compensated
   
97.17   Organization; election of officers
   
97.18   Appointment of committees
   
97.19   Meetings
   
97.20   Quorum; rules of parliamentary law to be enforced
   
97.21   Powers and duties
   
97.22   No authority to make expenditures or hire or fire library employees
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 97.01 FINES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Overdue materials.
      (1)   Library fines for each day, or part of each day, that the
hereinafter enumerated materials are retained beyond the due date for return
are hereby established as follows and the person responsible for said materials
are required to pay the following sums. Fines for overdue materials shall not
exceed the charge for lost materials as provided for in division (B) below.
      (1)   Book, audio book, CD, magazine, kits   $.20 per day
      (2)   DVD/VHS materials   $1.00 per day
      (3)   Interlibrary loan   $.50 per day
   (B)   Lost materials. Charges for lost materials shall be the full
replacement cost for the material lost provided such material is available.
Otherwise, charges for lost materials are established as follows; and the
library is hereby authorized to classify all books into one of the three
categories:
      (1)   Children's book   $15
      (2)   Juvenile book      $15
      (3)   Adult book      $25
      (4)   Texshare materials   Replacement cost
      (5)   Replacement card   $2
   (C)   Damaged materials. Damaged materials shall be repaired if practicable
with full repair charges paid by patron responsible for the materials.
Materials that are beyond repair shall be assessed the replacement cost.
   (D)   Nonresident fees. Any person residing outside of the corporate limits
of the city shall be required to pay a fee of $25 per year for the issuance of
a library card, which shall be valid for one year from date of issuance. The
foregoing notwithstanding, any person owning real property situated in the
corporate limits of the city and whose city ad valorem taxes are currently paid
shall, along with his or her spouse and minor children, as well as nonresident
employees and students of Cleburne Independent School District be exempt from
payment of the $25 fee.
   (E)   Processing fees. In addition to fines, replacement and/or damage
charges, a processing fee of up to $10 may be charged for each book overdue for
90 days or more, lost or damaged.
   (F)   Miscellaneous fees.
      (1)   Photo copies      $.15 black and white; $.50 color
      (2)   Laminating      $1.50 per foot
      (3)   Proctoring      $10 per test proctored
      (4)   Interlibrary loan   $3
   (G)   Amnesty program. The library may conduct an amnesty program for a
period of time not to exceed two weeks in any calendar year. During the period
of time the amnesty program is in effect, fines will be waived to all patrons
who appear in person to return overdue materials.
   (H)   Computer use policy and fees. The City Manager or his/her designee
shall implement the Computer, Internet and Wireless Policy and the procedure
for administering the policy. The following fees are included in the policy for
non-residents.
      (1)   Computer access card for six months   $10
      (2)   Computer access card for one year   $20
('68 Code, § 17½-19) (Ord. 5-1983-14, passed 5-10-83; Am. Ord. 2-1984-09,
passed 2-14-84; Am. Ord. 9-1986-43, passed 9-23-86; Am. Ord. 04-2006-31, passed
4-25-06; Am. Ord. 02-2009-07, passed 2-10-09; Am. Ord. 11-2011-63, passed 11-
22-11; Am. Ord. 07-2017-37, passed 7- 11-17; Am. Ord. 08-2018-60, passed 8-28-
18; Am. Ord. 09-2018-69, passed 9-25-18; Am. Ord. 11-2019-69, passed 11-12-19;
Am. Ord. 04- 2022-36, passed 4-26-22)
§ 97.02 INTENTIONAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to intentionally injure or deface any book, newspaper,
magazine, pamphlet, manuscript or other property owned by or subject to the
control of the library by writing, marking, tearing, breaking, mutilating or
otherwise injuring or defacing such property.
('68 Code, § 17½-20) (Ord. 5-1983-14, passed 5-10-83)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.03 UNLAWFUL RETENTION OF PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to retain any library materials or other property owned
by or subject to the control of the library for a period of seven days after
the giving of notice to return same, provided such notice is given after the
expiration of time for which such property was lent under the then rules of the
library. Such notice shall be given to the person or entity at the address,
phone number, or e-mail address reflected for same on the most recent library
card of such person or entity according to the then records of the library. The
date for return of such property according to the then rules of the library may
be proven upon trial of any offense under this section, by the submission into
evidence of the transaction records of the library.
('68 Code, § 17½-22) (Ord. 5-1983-14, passed 5-10-83; Am. Ord. 02- 2009-07,
passed 2-10-09; Am. Ord. 08-2018-60, passed 8-28-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
LIBRARY BOARD
§ 97.15 CREATED; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS OF MEMBERS.
   There is created and established a Library Board in and for the city. It
shall be composed of nine members, five of whom must reside in the city and
four of whom may reside outside the city but must reside in Johnson County
during the term of their appointment by the City Council. A member of the
Library Board shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council. Members of the
Board may serve no more than two consecutive two-year terms. However, the
members may serve more than once on the Board.
('68 Code, § 17½-11) (Ord. passed 11-8-66; Am. Ord. passed 2-11-69; Am. Ord. 4-
1981-10, passed 4-16-81; Am. Ord. 02-2009-07, passed 2-10-09)
Cross-reference:
   Boards, commissions and public bodies generally, see
Ch. 31.
§ 97.16 MEMBERS NOT COMPENSATED.
   Members of the Library Board shall serve without compensation.
('68 Code, § 17½-12) (Ord. passed 11-8-66; Am. Ord. passed 2-11-69)
§ 97.17 ORGANIZATION; ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
   Immediately after their appointment and confirmation by the City Council,
the members of the Library Board shall meet and organize, by electing a
President, Vice-President and Secretary. The Library Board shall, upon
organization, proceed to establish such rules and regulations for the
government of same, as in its judgment may be deemed necessary and proper.
('68 Code, § 17½-13) (Ord. passed 11-8-66; Am. Ord. passed 2-11-69)
§ 97.18 APPOINTMENT OF COMMITTEES.
   The Mayor shall appoint such committees of the Library Board as may be
provided for by the acts of the Board.
('68 Code, § 17½-14) (Ord. passed 11-8-66; Am. Ord. passed 2-11-69)
§ 97.19 MEETINGS.
   The Library Board shall hold such regular meetings as may be determined by
the Board, and as many other special or called meetings as may be deemed proper
and regular under the rules established by the Board. The Mayor may at any time
call the Board together for action on any matter which he might deem urgent and
important.
('68 Code, § 17½-15) (Ord. passed 11-8-66; Am. Ord. passed 2-11-69)
§ 97.20 QUORUM; RULES OF PARLIAMENTARY LAW TO BE ENFORCED.
   Six members of the Library Board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business, and the general rules of parliamentary law shall be
enforced in all proceedings of the Board.
('68 Code, § 17½-16) (Ord. passed 11-8-66; Am. Ord. passed 2-11-69; Am. Ord. 4-
1981-10, passed 4-16-81)
§ 97.21 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Library Board shall have general supervision and control of all
matters pertaining to the City Library, and shall promulgate the rules and
regulations pertaining to the operation and use of the library facilities and
shall have general supervision over such rules and regulations.
   (B)   It is made the duty and province of the Library Board to make
recommendations and suggestions to the City Council for the betterment and
improvement of the City Library.
('68 Code, § 17½-17) (Ord. passed 11-8-66; Am. Ord. passed 2-11-69)
§ 97.22 NO AUTHORITY TO MAKE EXPENDITURES OR HIRE OR FIRE LIBRARY EMPLOYEES.
   The Library Board shall not contract for the expenditure of any money unless
the same be authorized by the City Council, and shall not have authority to
employ or discharge employees working in the library.
('68 Code, § 17½-18) (Ord. passed 11-8-66; Am. Ord. passed 2-11-69)
CHAPTER 98: PARKS AND RECREATION; LAKE PAT CLEBURNE
Section
General Provisions
   
98.001   Management and control of parks
   
98.002   Hours open to the public; curfew; restrictions
   
98.003   Parking areas; illegal parking
   
98.004   Rules and regulations
   
98.005   Glass containers prohibited
Park and Recreation Board
   
98.015   Created; composition; appointment of members
   
98.016   Terms of members
   
98.017   Election of officers; rules of procedure
   
98.018   Duties
   
98.019   No authority to expend city funds or to order work done
Swimming Pools
   
98.025   Splash Station general rules
   
98.026   Splash Station hours of operation
   
98.027   Splash Station admission fees
Camping
   
98.030   Overnight camping
   
98.031   Waiver of restrictions
   
98.032   Enforcement
Lake Pat Cleburne
Part 1: General Provisions
   
98.045   Named
   
98.046   Definitions
   
98.047   Application
   
98.048   Supervision
   
98.049   Establishment of parks and picnic areas
   
98.050   Commercial areas and concessions
   
98.051   Buoys, floats and markers
   
98.052   Restricted areas
   
98.053   Restricted zone near raw water intake
   
98.054   Swimming permitted only in specified areas
   
98.055   Reserved
   
98.056   Trespass on dam
   
98.057   Structures prohibited in reservoir area; exceptions
   
98.058   Sewage system for dwellings within 1,300 feet of service spillway
level
   
98.059   Waste from industries, slaughterhouses and the like within watershed
   
98.060   Restrictions on animals and animal pens or barns
   
98.061   Land fills
   
98.062   Deposit of garbage, trash and the like prohibited
   
98.063   Destruction of property on lake
   
98.064   Hunting and discharge or possession of firearms prohibited
   
98.065   Skiing, surfboarding and the like
   
98.066   Children under 12 to be accompanied by adult
   
98.067   Ordering persons ashore due to weather
   
98.068   Obedience to instructions, warnings and signs relating to lake
   
98.069   Waiver of chapter provisions for special events
   
98.070   City not liable for damages; use of lake subject other regulations
   
98.071   Enforcement of law relating to lake
   
98.072   Exclusion of violators
   
98.073   Revocation of licenses and permits
   
98.074   Operation of motor vehicles prohibited except in designated areas
Part 2: Boats
   
98.080   Boats — Inspection and approval or disapproval
   
98.081   House boats, air boats, rafts and barges prohibited; exception; other
boats prohibited
   
98.082   Boats to be self sustaining; exception
   
98.083   Boat Lights
   
98.084   Search lighting
   
98.085   Life preservers
   
98.086   Muffling devices
   
98.087   Fire extinguishers
   
98.088   Backfire arrestor for carburetors
   
98.089   Ventilators
   
98.090   Toilet facilities
   
98.091   Sirens
   
98.092   Minimum age of operators
   
98.093   Launching permitted only at authorized points
   
98.094   Traffic rules
   
98.095   Reckless driving and speeding
   
98.096   Operation under the Influence; habitual user of liquor, drugs or
barbiturates
   
98.097   Carrying liquor
   
98.098   Use for commercial fishing or taking game
   
98.099   Riding on decks and gunwales
   
98.100   Obstruction of traffic lanes prohibited
   
98.101   Mooring to buoys, beacons or signs
   
98.102   Anchoring
   
98.103   Overloading
   
98.104   Accidents
   
98.105   Removal of boats from lake
   
98.106   Derelicts
Part 3: Fishing
   
98.115   Fishing — Applicability of state law
   
98.116   Fishing Prohibited near intake tower
   
98.117   Permitted fishing equipment
   
98.118   Destruction of abandoned or unlawful equipment
   
98.119   Prohibited bait
   
98.120   Commercial fishing prohibited
Part 4: Piers and Boathouses
   
98.125   Application of building code
   
98.126   General issues affecting boat docks/lake access sites
   
98.127   Permit required
   
98.128   Pier, dock, and boathouse permit requirements
   
98.129   Issuance of a permit
   
98.130   Existing non-conforming docks, piers, and boathouses
   
98.131   Maintenance of piers, docks, and boathouses
   
98.132   Removal of unpermitted piers, docks, and boathouses
Golf Course
   
98.200   General rules
   
98.201   Hours of operation
   
98.202   Fee schedule
Booker T. Washington Community and Recreation Center
   
98.300   General rules
   
98.301   Hours of operation
   
98.302   Fee schedule
Winston Patrick McGregor Park
   
98.400   General rules
   
98.401   Hours of operation
   
98.402   Fee schedule; Park House general rules
Cleburne Sports Complex
   
98.500   General rules
   
98.501   Hours of operation
   
98.502   Fee schedule
Don Moore Park and Carver Park
   
98.600   General rules
   
98.601   Hours of operation
   
98.602   Fee schedule
 
   
98.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 98.001 MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL OF PARKS.
   The public parks of the city and all the facilities located therein shall be
under the management and control of the City Manager or his duly appointed
Parks Director.
('68 Code, § 20-1) (Am. Ord. 6-1977-22, passed 6-14-77)
§ 98.002 HOURS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC; CURFEW; RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   There shall be a curfew in all parks located within the corporate
limits of the city, in which park and recreation areas shall be open to the
public. The parks shall be open to the public daily between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m. unless otherwise posted.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any portion of a city
park or recreation area which is designated as restricted or closed or to enter
any area during the hours of the day when such area is not open to the public
or to enter at any time when the area is closed for the season or to use the
facilities in a wasteful or damaging manner.
   (C)   The City Manager or duly appointed designee shall have the authority
to waive curfew restrictions in all city parks for such special activities as
may be deemed appropriate.
(‘68 Code, § 20-2) (Ord. passed 9-14-71; Am. Ord. 6-1977-22, passed 6-14-77;
Am. Ord. 3-1999-31, passed 3-9-99; Am. Ord. 08-2016-39, passed 8-23-16; Am.
Ord. 04-2024-27, passed 4-23-24) Penalty, see §
98.999
§ 98.003 PARKING AREAS; ILLEGAL PARKING.
   (A)   To avoid damage to the park facilities and to alleviate danger to the
people within the parks, designated parking areas shall be established.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or park any
motor vehicle in a park other than roadways and designated parking areas and in
areas of a public park that are so posted or separated in such a manner so as
to indicate that vehicles are not allowed.
   (C)   Each park shall have a designated parking area clearly defined by
posts, signs, fences, or other means and all vehicles parking in city parks
shall park only in these designated areas.
   (D)   The Community Services Director shall have the authority to waive
parking restrictions in all city parks for such special activities as may be
deemed appropriate.
('68 Code, § 20-3) (Ord. 7-1976-29, passed 7-13-76; Am. Ord. 6-1977-22, passed
6-14-77; Am. Ord. 10-1997-81, passed 10-14-97)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.004 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey the rules and
regulations posted in the parks and recreation areas.
('68 Code, § 20-4) (Ord. 6-1977-22, passed 6-14-77)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.005 GLASS CONTAINERS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring, or cause to be brought, or
possess any glass beverage containers in or upon any city park or recreational
area including all city parks, Lake Pat Cleburne recreational areas, golf
course and swimming pool facilities.
(Ord. 6-2002-36, passed 6-11-02)
Penalty, see § 98.999
Cross-reference:
   Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages on city property and
certain areas adjacent to parks prohibited, see §
130.20
PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
§ 98.015 CREATED; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   There is created a Park and Recreation Board for the city. The Board
shall be composed of seven members who shall be appointed by the City Council.
   (B)   The City Manager shall serve as an ex officio member of the Park and
Recreation Board.
('68 Code, § 20-12) (Ord. passed 6-23-66; Am. Ord. 4-2002-20, passed 4-9-02)
Cross-reference:
Boards, commissions and public bodies generally, see
 
Ch. 31.
§ 98.016 TERMS OF MEMBERS.
   Members of the Park and Recreation Board shall serve for a term of two years
and until their successors have been appointed.
('68 Code, § 20-13) (Ord. passed 6-23-66)
§ 98.017 ELECTION OF OFFICERS; RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   The Park and Recreation Board shall make its own rules for election of
officers and the conduct of its business.
('68 Code, § 20-14) (Ord. passed 6-23-66)
§ 98.018 DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Park and Recreation Board to make plans for
future developments and welfare of the city in regard to parks and recreation,
to confer with and make recommendations to the City Manager relating to such
plans, to conduct programs of education for the effective carrying out of such
plans, and to assist the City Manager and the City Council in development and
adoption of such plans and recommendations in every way possible.
('68 Code, § 20-15) (Ord. passed 6-23-66)
§ 98.019 NO AUTHORITY TO EXPEND CITY FUNDS OR TO ORDER WORK DONE.
   The Park and Recreation Board shall have no authority to make expenditure of
city funds, nor to order any work done on its own authority.
('68 Code, § 20-16) (Ord. passed 6-23-66)
SWIMMING POOLS
§ 98.025 SPLASH STATION GENERAL RULES.
   Splash Station general rules are hereby established and rules for the safe
use of the Splash Station shall be determined prior to its opening to the
public.
(Ord. 04-2004-18, passed 4-13-04)
§ 98.026 SPLASH STATION HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Splash Station hours of operation are hereby established:
HOURS OF OPERATION
Summer season
Fit Swim                 Monday thru Friday       6:30 a.m. to 9:30 a.m.
                         Monday thru Saturday -   12:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Family Swim (Water Park) Closed Friday
                         Sunday                   1:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Winter season
                                                  6:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m., 11:
Fit Swim                 Monday thru Friday       00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m., 4:00
                                                  p.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Family Swim (Water Park) Open 2nd Saturday of the 12:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
                         month
 
   (B)   The City Manager shall be authorized to set other fees and/or hours
that are yet to be determined.
(Ord. 03-2005-20, passed 3-8-05; Am. Ord. 04-2007-19, passed 4-10-07; Am. Ord.
03-2008-19, passed 3-25-08; Am. Ord. 04-2011-20, passed 4-28-11; Am. Ord. 09-
2014-75, passed 9-9-14)
§ 98.027 SPLASH STATION ADMISSION FEES.
   (A)   Splash Station admission fees are hereby established as follows:
 
SPLASH STATION FEE SCHEDULE
Annual pass - valid for one year from date of issue
All swim teams and swim      Individual               $125
groups are required to
purchase annual pass either
individual or family, or pay                          $350 +$10 for each addl.
daily admission fee to use   Family (up to 4 members) family member
facility with the exception
of Cleburne High School swim
team.
Season pass (Summer: Memorial Day thru Labor Day)
                             Individual               $75
                             Family                   $225
 
SPLASH STATION FEE SCHEDULE
SPLASH STATION FEE SCHEDULE
General admission
   Summer           Per person, ages 3 & up      $6
                      Per person, ages 2 & under   FREE
                      Per person, ages 50 & up     $3
   Teen Night       Per person, ages 11 to 17    $10
                      Per person, with military ID $4
   Winter           Per person, ages 3 & up      $3
                      Per person, ages 2 & under   FREE
                      Per person, ages 50 & up     $3
   Teen Night       Per person, ages 11 to 17    $10
                      Per person, with military ID $4
Fit swim punch card
                      5 visits                     $15
                      10 visits                    $25
                      30 visits                    $60
Group admission ( 25+) Per person per day           $5
Day care rate          Per person per day           $4
Park rental (private party - exclusive use of facility)
                      Initial 2 hours              $1,000
                      Each additional hour         $400
Air dome rental (private party - exclusive use of facility)
                      Initial 2 hours              $250
                      Each additional hour         $100
Birthday parties (or other private function with nonexclusive use of
facility)
                      Party package “A”        $220
                      Party package “B”        $130
                      Party package “C”        $50
 
   (B)   All new and returning lifeguards will be charged the market price as
determined or modified periodically by the American Red Cross who governs their
training certificates and subject materials required to perform lifeguarding
duties.
   (C)   The City Manager shall be authorized to set or negotiate rates for
groups, tournaments and special events, and to set other fees not otherwise
specified.
(Ord. 04-2004-18, passed 4-13-04; Am. Ord. 06-2004-36, passed 6-8-04; Am. Ord.
03-2005-20, passed 3-8-05; Am. Ord. 02-2007-11, passed 2-13-07; Am. Ord. 03-
2008-20, passed 3-25-08; Am. Ord. 04-2011-19, passed 4-28-11; Am. Ord. 02-2014-
13, passed 2-25-14; Am. Ord. 09-2014-75, passed 9-9-14; Am. Ord. 02-2022-16,
passed 2-22-2022)
CAMPING
§ 98.030 OVERNIGHT CAMPING.
   No overnight camping is allowed at any Cleburne Parks and Recreation
Department facility.
(Ord. 10-2000-51, passed 10-10-00; Am. Ord. 08-2010-48, passed 8-10- 10; Am.
Ord. 10-2015-72, passed 10-27-15) Penalty, see §
98.999
§ 98.031 WAIVER OF RESTRICTIONS.
   The City Manager or his or her designee shall have the authority to waive
any restriction of this subchapter for a special event or situation.
(Ord. 10-2000-51, passed 10-10-00) Penalty, see §
98.999
§ 98.032 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Cleburne Police Department and those employees designated by the Parks
Director shall have the authority to enforce the provisions in this subchapter.
(‘68 Code, § 20-24) (Ord. 12-1977-53, passed 12-13-77; Am. Ord. 10- 2015-72,
passed 10-27-15)
LAKE PAT CLEBURNE
Part 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 98.045 NAMED.
   The water reservoir located on the Nolan's River in Johnson County, Texas,
owned by the City, is named and shall be known and referred to as “Lake Pat
Cleburne.”
('68 Code, § 17-1) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
§ 98.046 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LAKE. Lake Pat Cleburne, as named in §
98.001.
   LAKE PAT CLEBURNE RESERVOIR AREA or RESERVOIR AREA. That area bounded by the
Lake Pat Cleburne Dam and the contour line of elevation 743 feet above mean sea
level, lying upstream from such dam.
('68 Code, § 17-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
§ 98.047 APPLICATION.
   The provisions and regulations of this subchapter shall govern the
commercial, recreational, and other activities on the lake and lake property.
('68 Code, § 17-3) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
§ 98.048 SUPERVISION.
   Except as otherwise provided, supervision of the entire lake property shall
be under the City Manager.
('68 Code, § 17-5) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
§ 98.049 ESTABLISHMENT OF PARKS AND PICNIC AREAS.
   Certain areas adjacent to Lake Pat Cleburne shall be set aside and developed
by the city as public parks and picnic areas for use by the public.
('68 Code, § 17-6) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
§ 98.050 COMMERCIAL AREAS AND CONCESSIONS.
   (A)   Areas at the lake shall be set aside for commercial purposes, such as
the rental of boats and motors and sale of bait and supplies. Any person to
whom a concession is let shall be responsible for observance of all rules and
regulations, and for the performance of such other duties as required by his
contract.
   (B)   Concessions may be let at the lake to any parties desiring to operate
a community boat house, public fishing pier, and other types as approved by the
City Council. Concession rights will be let on a bid basis. The number and
location of these facilities shall be controlled by the City Council.
('68 Code, § 17-7) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
§ 98.051 BUOYS, FLOATS AND MARKERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to install, keep, use or maintain any
buoy, float or marker in the waters of Lake Pat Cleburne made of metal, glass
or wood; except that it shall be lawful for the city to install, keep, use or
maintain buoys, floats and markers made of metal, glass or wood upon the waters
of the lake, for the purpose of marking areas restricted for reasons of safety
and for sanitation.
('68 Code, § 17-8) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.052 RESTRICTED AREAS.
   No person shall engage in wading, bathing, swimming, fishing, boating,
skiing, surfboarding, or any other activity in or upon Lake Pat Cleburne within
a quarter of a mile of the service spillway or any municipal water intake in
the lake.
('68 Code, § 17-9) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.053 RESTRICTED ZONE NEAR RAW WATER INTAKE.
   (A)   Upon the recommendation of the State Department of Health, a
restricted zone is established within a 200-foot radius of the raw water intake
on Lake Pat Cleburne. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such
restricted zone and all recreational activities shall be prohibited therein.
   (B)   There shall be buoys and signs marking the restricted area established
in this section and signs setting out that a penalty will be imposed if such
zone is violated.
('68 Code, § 17-10(a),(b)) (Ord. passed 6-16-67)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.054 SWIMMING PERMITTED ONLY IN SPECIFIED AREAS.
   No person shall swim, wade, bathe or otherwise immerse himself in the waters
of Lake Pat Cleburne except in specified areas designated by the city.
('68 Code, § 17-11) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.055 RESERVED.
§ 98.056 TRESPASS ON DAM.
   No person shall, in any manner, go upon any part of the Lake Pat Cleburne
Dam for any purpose.
('68 Code, § 17-13) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.057 STRUCTURES PROHIBITED IN RESERVOIR AREA; EXCEPTIONS.
   No duck blinds, ski jumps, or other structures of whatever nature shall be
constructed or placed in the Lake Pat Cleburne reservoir area; provided,
however, that this section shall not preclude the construction of piers and
boathouses in the manner provided in this subchapter.
('68 Code, § 17-14) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.058 SEWAGE SYSTEM FOR DWELLINGS WITHIN 1,300 FEET OF SERVICE SPILLWAY
LEVEL.
   All habitations located within 1,300 feet of the service spillway level
(elevation 733.5 feet above mean sea level) in Lake Pat Cleburne shall be
connected to a municipal sanitary sewer system, or shall be connected to an
approved septic tank, the minimum requirements for which shall be as follows:
   (A)   Tank prefabricated, 500 gallons.
   (B)   Lateral lines, vitrified clay, shall be 250 feet or more in length,
shall be equipped with a distribution box, and shall be installed in a manner
approved by the City Engineer.
   (C)   Inspection shall be made by a City Engineering Department
representative before the tank and lines are covered.
   (D)   The lowest point in the lateral system shall be at least 737.5 feet
above mean sea level in elevation.
   (E)   No part of such system shall be less than 150 feet (measured
horizontally) from the spillway level.
   (F)   Installations serving more than one dwelling unit, or any type of
commercial installation, shall be installed in a manner approved by the City
Engineer.
('68 Code, § 17-15) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.059 WASTE FROM INDUSTRIES, SLAUGHTERHOUSES AND THE LIKE WITHIN WATERSHED.
   If industries are contemplated to be established within the Lake Pat
Cleburne watershed, approval of the proposed project by the Texas State
Department of Public Health and the Health Department of the city concerning
the treatment of wastes is deemed necessary to prevent undesirable conditions
from occurring. No slaughterhouses, markets, or meat shops where hogs, beeves,
or other animals or fowls are slaughtered shall be located where any refuse;
discharge or contents thereof of any nature whatsoever shall be discharged into
the lake or its watershed.
('68 Code, § 17-16) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.060 RESTRICTIONS ON ANIMALS AND ANIMAL PENS OR BARNS.
   No animals or livestock shall be permitted nearer to Lake Pat Cleburne than
the emergency spillway level (elevation 743.4 feet above mean sea level). No
animal pens, corrals or barns shall be constructed within 300 feet (measured
horizontally) of such emergency spillway elevation, nor shall they be
constructed at any point from which drainage may run into Lake Pat Cleburne or
into any stream which lies within the lake watershed.
('68 Code, § 17-17) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.061 LAND FILLS.
   No filling of land with dirt, rock or any other material shall be permitted
in the Reservoir below an elevation of 743.4 feet above mean sea level without
the written permission of the City Council.
('68 Code, § 17-18) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.062 DEPOSIT OF GARBAGE, TRASH AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   No garbage, trash, refuse, dead animal, fish, vegetable, food, ashes, offal,
fecal matter, cans, bottles, glass, rubbish or filth of any kind shall be
placed or be permitted to be placed in the waters of Lake Pat Cleburne or
situated in such a manner that it will drain toward or reach the waters of Lake
Pat Cleburne.
('68 Code, § 17-19) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.063 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY ON LAKE.
   Any person who shall wilfully or mischievously injure or destroy property of
any description on Lake Pat Cleburne shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
('68 Code, § 17-20) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.064 HUNTING AND DISCHARGE OR POSSESSION OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED.
   Hunting or the discharge of firearms of any type whatever or the possession
of firearms on Lake Pat Cleburne is prohibited.
('68 Code, § 17-21) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.065 SKIING, SURFBOARDING AND THE LIKE.
   The activities of skiing, surfboarding and other comparable water sports on
the lake shall be governed as follows:
   (A)   All persons directly engaged in such activities shall wear life
preservers at all times.
   (B)   Boats towing persons engaged in such activities shall go no nearer
than 200 feet of docks, swimming areas or fishermen.
   (C)   Such activities shall not be engaged in from the period of one hour
after sunset to one hour prior to sunrise, nor shall any person operate a boat
for the purpose of towing persons engaged in such activities from the period of
one hour after sunset to one hour prior to sunrise; provided, that this
provision shall not apply to boats, craft and individuals participating in duly
authorized ski tournaments, competitions, exhibitions or trials therefor, where
adequate lighting is provided.
   (D)   Any boat or other craft towing persons engaged in such activities must
be occupied by at least two people, one to observe the persons engaged in such
activity and the other to operate the boat or other craft.
   (E)   No tow boat or person engaged in any such activity shall approach
closer than 150 feet to any other boat or craft when proceeding at speed.
   (F)   Such activities shall not be engaged in north of Country Club Road.
   (G)   No boat or other craft shall follow closer than 200 feet behind a
person engaged in any such activity.
('68 Code, § 17-22) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.066 CHILDREN UNDER 12 TO BE ACCOMPANIED BY ADULT.
   No child under the age of 12 years shall be permitted to enter or remain in
or upon Lake Pat Cleburne unless accompanied by and under the immediate
supervision at all times of some adult person.
('68 Code, § 17-23) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.067 ORDERING PERSONS ASHORE DUE TO WEATHER.
   When, in the opinion of the City Manager or his authorized representative,
severe weather is forecast or when weather conditions on the lake are such as
to render boating, fishing, swimming and other activities hazardous, he shall
have the authority to order all persons and all boats and other craft ashore,
under such terms and conditions as, in the sole judgment of the City Manager or
his representative, are deemed necessary for the protection of life, limb and
property. Any person failing to obey such instructions under such circumstances
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('68 Code, § 17-24) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.068 OBEDIENCE TO INSTRUCTIONS, WARNINGS AND SIGNS RELATING TO LAKE.
   No person shall fail or refuse to obey any lawful instruction or warning
issued by many police officer or other authorized representative of the city,
in enforcing the provisions of this subchapter, nor shall any person fail or
refuse to obey any instruction or warning displayed upon any sign erected at
the lake by the city.
('68 Code, § 17-25) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.069 WAIVER OF CHAPTER PROVISIONS FOR SPECIAL EVENTS.
   The City Council may, upon application and after hearing, waive for a
specified length of time such of the terms, provisions and conditions of this
subchapter as may be deemed appropriate for the accommodation of water
carnivals, shows, boat races, swimming meets, educational purposes, exhibitions
and other special events as may be permitted from time to time, and subject to
such safety measures as the City Council may require.
('68 Code, § 17-26) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
§ 98.070 CITY NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGES; USE OF LAKE SUBJECT OTHER REGULATIONS.
   The city shall in no event be liable to any person on account of the loss or
damage to any property that may be placed in or upon Lake Pat Cleburne, nor
shall the city be liable in any event to any person or persons whomsoever on
account of personal injuries or loss of life that may be sustained by any
person in or upon the lake, and any person entering in or upon the lake shall
do so at his or her sole risk, and shall not be privileged to enter or remain
in or upon the lake save and except under the terms and provisions of this
chapter and such other applicable code provision, ordinance, resolution and
regulation that have been, or may hereafter be, adopted by the city.
('68 Code, § 17-27) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.071 ENFORCEMENT OF LAW RELATING TO LAKE.
   It shall be the duty of the police to patrol Lake Pat Cleburne and the
adjoining lands for the purpose of enforcing strict compliance on the part of
all persons with the terms, provisions and conditions of this chapter and all
other laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the city relating to the lake,
and to make arrests upon the violation of any ordinance, code provision or
regulation of the city.
('68 Code, § 17-28) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
§ 98.072 EXCLUSION OF VIOLATORS.
   Any police officer, or other authorized representative of the city shall
have the right and authority to exclude from the premises any person in or upon
the lake in violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter.
('68 Code, § 17-29) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
§ 98.073 REVOCATION OF LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   The City Manager shall have full power to revoke any license or permit
issued under this chapter for the violation or infringement of the rules or
regulations prescribed in this chapter. If for any reason a person's license or
permit is revoked, he or she shall have the right to appeal the revocation to
the City Council. Any such revocation shall be in addition to any penalty
imposed for such violation.
('68 Code, § 17-30) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
§ 98.074 OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED EXCEPT IN DESIGNATED AREAS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in the
Lake Pat Cleburne Reservoir Area except on a roadway or parking area designated
for motor vehicles.
   (B)   The provisions of this section do not apply to a city employee in the
performance of an official duty.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
      VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported upon a public highway, except devices moved by human power.
   (D)   All rights and remedies of the city are expressly saved as to any and
all violations of the provisions of any other ordinances affecting conduct at
Lake Pat Cleburne Reservoir which have accrued at the time of the effective
date of this section; and, as to such accrued violations and all pending
litigation, both civil and criminal, whether pending in court or not, under
such ordinances same shall not be affected by this section but may be
prosecuted until final disposition by the courts.
(Ord. 06-2009-35, passed 6-23-09) Penalty, see §
98.999
Part 2: BOATS
§ 98.080 BOATS — INSPECTION AND APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL.
   It shall be the duty of the City Manager or his authorized representatives
to inspect all boats and other craft before the same are permitted to be placed
on Lake Pat Cleburne, and to issue to the owner or person in charge thereof a
certificate of approval or disapproval. If for any reason such officer should
be of the opinion that any boat or other craft is unsafe and unworthy or
dangerous to life, a certificate of disapproval shall be issued which fully
states the reasons for such disapproval, and the owner of or person in charge
of such boat or other craft shall have the right to submit such matter to the
City Council, whose decision shall in all cases be final.
('68 Code, § 17-42) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
§ 98.081 HOUSE BOATS, AIR BOATS, RAFTS AND BARGES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION; OTHER
BOATS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall place, operate, or keep any craft commonly referred to
as a house boat, air boat, raft or barge on Lake Pat Cleburne; provided,
however, that the City Manager may grant, for a period not to exceed 30 days,
permission to use a raft or barge on the lake for construction, dredging and
other like purposes, and nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the
city and its authorized representatives from using rafts and barges for the
operation and maintenance of the lake.
   (B)   No boat shall be operated on Lake Pat Cleburne that exceeds the
centerline length-power ratio listed below:
                  Maximum Horse Power
Centerline Length Outboard Inboard
                  Maximum Horse Power
Centerline Length Outboard Inboard
13' or less       25 hp    —
13' – 14'       65 hp    —
14' – 15'       90 hp    120 hp
15' – 16'       115 hp   160 hp
16' – 17'       140 hp   160 hp
17' – 18'       160 hp   160 hp
18' – 19'       175 hp   175 hp
19' – 21'       175 hp   240 hp
21' or greater    175 hp   240 hp
 
('68 Code, § 17-43) (Ord. passed 8-11-64; Am. Ord. passed 9-9-69)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.082 BOATS TO BE SELF SUSTAINING; EXCEPTION.
   No boat or other craft shall be operated on Lake Pat Cleburne unless the
same is self sustaining, either by patent methods, compartmentation or
composition. Inboard power boats shall be excepted from this section.
('68 Code, § 17-44) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.083 BOAT LIGHTS.
   (A)   A vessel or motorboat when not at dock must have and exhibit at least
one bright light, lantern, or flashlight from sunset to sunrise in all weather.
A vessel or motorboat when underway between sunset and sunrise in all weather
must have and exhibit the lights prescribed below for boats of its class. No
other lights that may be mistaken for those prescribed may be exhibited.
   (B)   Each class A and class 1 motorboat must have the following lights:
      (1)   A bright white light aft to show all around the horizon; and
      (2)   A combined lantern in the fore part of the vessel and lower than
the white light aft, showing green to starboard and red to port, so fixed as to
throw the light from right ahead to two points abaft the beam on their
respective sides.
   (C)   Each class 2 and class 3 motorboat must have the following lights and
light screens:
      (1)   A bright white light in the fore part of the vessel as near the
stem as practicable, so constructed as to show an unbroken light over an arc of
the horizon of 20 points of the compass and so fixed as to throw the light 10
points on each side of the vessel, namely from right ahead to two points abaft
the beam on either side;
      (2)   A bright white light aft to show all around the horizon and higher
than the white light forward;
      (3)   A green light on the starboard side so constructed as to show an
unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of 10 points of the compass and so
fixed as to throw the light from right ahead to two points abaft the beam on
the starboard side;
      (4)   A red light on the port side so constructed as to show an unbroken
light over an arc of the horizon of 10 points of the compass and so fixed as to
throw the light right ahead to two points abaft the beam on the port side; and
      (5)   Inboard screens fitted on the starboard and port side lights of
sufficient length and so set as to prevent the side lights from being seen
across the bow.
   (D)   Each class A and class 1 motorboat when propelled by sail alone must
have the combined lantern but not the white light aft prescribed in division
(B) of this section.
   (E)   Each class 3 and class 3 motorboat when propelled by sail alone must
have the colored side lights, suitably screened, but not the white lights
prescribed in division (C) of this section.
   (F)   Motorboats of all classes when propelled by sail alone must have ready
at hand a lantern or flashlight showing a white light which shall be exhibited
in sufficient time to prevent collision.
   (G)   A white light required by this section must be visible at a distance
of at least two miles. A colored light required by this section must be visible
at a distance of at least one mile. In this section, VISIBLE means visible on
dark nights with a clear atmosphere.
   (H)   A motorboat propelled by sail and machinery must have the lights
required by this section for motorboats propelled by machinery alone.
   (I)   A motorboat may have and exhibit the lights required by the
Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea, 1948, Act of October 11, 1951,
current provisions being 33 USC 1601 et seq., as amended, instead of the lights
specified in this section.
(Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.064) ('68 Code, § 17-45) (Ord. passed 8-11-
64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.084 SEARCH LIGHTING.
   No person shall flash searchlights on the bridge of a boat or other craft
being operated on Lake Pat Cleburne.
('68 Code, § 17-46) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.085 LIFE PRESERVERS.
   (A)   A motorboat must have at least one life preserver, life belt, ring
buoy, or other device of the sort prescribed by the regulations of the
commandant of the Coast Guard for each person on board, so placed as to be
readily accessible.
   (B)   A motorboat carrying passengers for hire must have a readily
accessible life preserver of the sort prescribed by the regulations of the
commandant of the Coast Guard for each person on board.
   (C)   The operator of a class A or class 1 motorboat, while underway, shall
require every passenger under 13 years of age to wear a life preserver of the
sort prescribed by the regulations of the commandant of the Coast Guard. A life
belt or ring buoy does not satisfy this requirement.
(Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.066) ('68 Code, § 17-47) (Ord. passed 8-11-
64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.086 MUFFLING DEVICES.
   A motorboat operating on the water of this state must have an exhaust water
manifold or a factory-type muffler installed on the engine.
(Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.070) ('68 Code, § 17-48) (Ord. passed 8-11-
64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.087 FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.
   (A)   A motorboat must have the number, size, and type of fire extinguishers
prescribed by the commandant of the Coast Guard.
   (B)   The fire extinguishers must be capable of promptly and effectively
extinguishing burning gasoline. They must be kept in condition for immediate
and effective use at all times and must be placed so as to be readily
accessible.
(Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.067) ('68 Code, § 17-49) (Ord. passed 8-11-
64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.088 BACKFIRE ARRESTOR FOR CARBURETORS.
   A motorboat must have the carburetor or carburetors of every engine using
gasoline as fuel, except outboard motors, equipped with an efficient flame
arrestor, backfire trap, or other similar device prescribed by the regulations
of the commandant of the Coast Guard.
(Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.068) ('68 Code, § 17-50) (Ord. passed 8-11-
64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.089 VENTILATORS.
   Each motorboat and vessel, except an open boat, using as fuel any liquid of
a volatile nature must have the equipment prescribed by the commandant of the
Coast Guard designed to ventilate properly and efficiently the bilges of the
engine and fuel tank compartments so as to remove any explosive or inflammable
gases.
(Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.069) ('68 Code, § 17-51) (Ord. passed 8-11-
64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.090 TOILET FACILITIES.
   No boat or other craft shall be placed, operated or kept on Lake Pat
Cleburne if equipped with toilet facilities, unless a special permit in writing
is obtained from the city therefor, and maintenance and operation of special
equipment for the storage of all wastes and disposal thereof on shore is
provided for, all in a manner approved by the City Engineer.
('68 Code, § 17-52) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.091 SIRENS.
   No person shall equip, own or operate a boat or other craft on Lake Pat
Cleburne which is equipped with a siren.
('68 Code, § 17-53) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.092 MINIMUM AGE OF OPERATORS.
   No person may operate a motorboat of over 15 horsepower on the public waters
of this state unless the person is 13 years of age or older, or is accompanied
by a person 16 years of age or older, or has successfully passed a boating
safety course prescribed and approved by the department.
(Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.107) ('68 Code, § 17-54) (Ord. passed 8-11-
64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.093 LAUNCHING PERMITTED ONLY AT AUTHORIZED POINTS.
   No person shall launch a boat or other craft on Lake Pat Cleburne except at
points designated and authorized by the city.
('68 Code, § 17-55) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.094 TRAFFIC RULES.
   (A)   Generally. The traffic rules prescribed in this section shall be
observed by boats and other craft operating on Lake Pat Cleburne.
   (B)   Passing. When two boats or other craft are approaching each other
“head-on” or nearly so (so as to involve risk of collision), it shall be the
duty of each boat to bear to the right and pass the other boat on its left
side.
   (C)   Crossing. When boats approach each other obliquely or at right angles,
the boat approaching on the right side has the right-of-way.
   (D)   Overtaking. One boat may overtake another on either side, but must
grant the right-of-way to the overtaken boat.
   (E)   Rules of the road. Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, the
rules of the road as applicable to U.S. Coast Guard Inland Waterways, as the
same now are, or as the same may be amended, applicable to the operation of
small boats, are hereby adopted and made a part hereof.
('68 Code, § 17-56) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.095 RECKLESS DRIVING AND SPEEDING.
   (A)   Every operator of a boat or other craft on Lake Pat Cleburne shall at
all times navigate the same in a careful and prudent manner and at such rate of
speed as not to endanger the life, limb or property of any person.
   (B)   Reckless navigation of any boat or other craft on Lake Pat Cleburne
shall include operating the same in a manner which unnecessarily interferes
with the free and proper use of the water of the lake or unnecessarily
endangers other boats and craft therein, or the life and limb of any person.
   (C)   No person shall operate any boat or other craft on Lake Pat Cleburne
at a rate of speed greater than will permit, by the exercise of reasonable
care, such boat to be brought to a stop within the assured clear distance
ahead.
('68 Code, § 17-57) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.096 OPERATION UNDER THE INFLUENCE; HABITUAL USER OF LIQUOR, DRUGS OR
BARBITURATES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. This term has the meaning assigned by Tex. Alcoholic
Beverages Code § 1.04.
   ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION. This term means:
      (1)   The number of grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood;
      (2)   The number of grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath; or
      (3)   The number of grams of alcohol per 67 milliliters of urine.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. This term has the meaning assigned by Tex. Health and
Safety Code § 481.002.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOGUE. This term has the meaning assigned by Tex.
Health and Safety Code § 481.002.
   DRUG. This term has the meaning assigned by Tex. Health and Safety Code §
481.002.
   INTOXICATED. This term means:
      (1)   Not having the normal use of mental or physical faculties by reason
of the introduction of alcohol, a controlled substance, a controlled substance
analogue, a drug, or a combination of two or more of those substances into the
body; or
      (2)   Having an alcohol concentration of 0.10 or more.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Injury that creates a substantial risk of death or
that causes serious temporary or permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   (B)   No person may operate a moving vessel or manipulate water skis, an
aquaplane, or a similar device while the person is intoxicated. For the purpose
of this section, a vessel does not include any device that is propelled solely
by the current of the water. A person who violates this subsection commits an
offense.
   (C)   Except as provided by divisions (D), (E), and (F) of this section, an
offense under division (B) of this section is punishable by:
      (1)   A fine not less than $100 or more than $1000;
      (2)   Confinement in jail for a term not to exceed 180 days; or
      (3)   Both the fine and confinement in jail.
   (D)   If it is shown at the trial of a person that the person has previously
been convicted once of an offense under division (B) of this section, the
offense is punishable by:
      (1)   A fine of not less than $300 or more than $2,000;
      (2)   Confinement in jail for a term not to exceed one year; or
      (3)   Both the fine and confinement in jail.
   (E)   If it is shown at the trial of a person that the person has previously
been convicted two or more times of an offense under division (B) of this
section, the offense is punishable by:
      (1)   A fine of not less than $500 or more than $2,000; and
      (2)   Confinement in jail for a term of not less than 30 days or more
than two years or imprisonment in the state penitentiary for a term of not less
than 60 days or more than five years.
   (F)   A conviction under division (B) of this section may not be used for
the purpose of enhancement under division (D) or (E) if:
      (1)   The conviction was for an offense committed more than five years
before the offense for which the person is being tried was committed; and
      (2)   The person has not been convicted of an offense under division (B)
committed within five years immediately preceding the date on which the offense
for which the person is being tried was committed.
   (G)   If it is shown at the trial of a person punished for an offense under
division (C), (D), or (E) of this section that the person committed the offense
and as a direct result of the offense another person suffered serious bodily
injury, the minimum term of confinement for the offense is increased by 60 days
and the minimum and maximum fines for the offense are increased by $500.
   (H)   A person who operates a moving vessel or manipulates water skis, an
aquaplane, or a similar device is deemed to have given consent, subject to this
section, to the taking of one or more specimens of the person's breath or blood
for the purpose of analysis to determine the alcohol concentration or the
presence in the person's body of a controlled substance, controlled substance
analogue, or drug if the person is arrested for any offense arising out of acts
alleged to have been committed while the person was operating or in actual
physical control of a moving vessel or manipulating water skis, an aquaplane,
or a similar device while intoxicated. A person so arrested may consent to the
giving of any other type of specimen to determine the person's alcohol
concentration, but the person is not deemed, solely on the basis of the
person's operation of a moving vessel or manipulating water skis, an aquaplane,
or a similar device, to have given consent to give any specimen other than a
specimen of the person's breath or blood. The specimen or specimens shall be
taken at the request of a peace officer having probable cause to believe the
person was operating or in actual physical control of a moving vessel or
manipulating water skis, an aquaplane, or a similar device while intoxicated.
   (I)   When a person gives a specimen of blood at the request or order of a
peace officer under this section, only a physician, qualified technician,
chemist, registered professional nurse, or licensed vocational nurse may
withdraw a blood specimen for the purpose of determining the alcohol
concentration or presence of a controlled substance, controlled substance
analogue, or drug in the blood. The sample must be taken in a sanitary place
inspected periodically by the county in which the sample is taken or in a
physician's office or a hospital licensed by the Texas Department of Health.
This limitation does not apply to the taking of specimens of breath, urine, or
bodily substances other than blood. The person drawing the blood specimen at
the request or order of a peace officer under this section or the hospital
where that person is taken for the purpose of securing the blood specimen is
not liable for damages arising from the request or order of the peace officer
to take the blood specimen as provided by this section, if the blood specimen
was withdrawn according to recognized medical procedures This division does not
relieve a person from liability for negligence in withdrawing a blood specimen.
Breath specimens taken at the request or order of a peace officer must be taken
and analysis made under conditions prescribed by division (B), Section 3,
Chapter 434, Acts of the 61st Legislature, Regular Session, 1969 , being Tex.
Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6701l-5.
   (J)   A person who gives a specimen of breath, blood, urine, or other bodily
substance under this section may, on request and within a reasonable time not
to exceed two hours after the arrest, have a physician, qualified technician,
chemist, or registered professional nurse of the person's own choosing draw a
specimen and have an analysis made of the person's blood in addition to any
specimen taken and analyzed at the direction of a peace officer. The failure or
inability to obtain an additional specimen or analysis by a person does not
preclude the admission of evidence relating to the analysis of the specimen
taken at the direction of the peace officer under this section.
   (K)   On the request of a person who has given a specimen at the request of
a peace officer, full information concerning the analytical results of the test
or tests of the specimen shall be made available to the person or the person's
attorney.
   (L)   If for any reason the person's request to have a chemical test is
refused by the officer or any other person acting for or on behalf of the
state, that fact may be introduced into evidence at the person's trial.
   (M) If the person refuses a request by an officer to give a specimen of
breath or blood, whether the refusal is express or the result of an intentional
failure of the person to give the specimen, that fact may be introduced into
evidence at the person's trial.
   (N)   Before requesting a person to give a specimen, the officer shall
inform the person orally and in writing that if the person refuses to give the
specimen that refusal may be admissible in a subsequent prosecution. The
officer shall provide the person with a written statement containing this
information. If the person refuses the request of the officer to give a
specimen, the officer shall request the person to sign a statement that the
officer requested that the person give a specimen, that the person was informed
of the consequence of not giving a specimen, and that the person refused to
give a specimen.
   (O)   Except as provided by division (Q) of this section, if a person under
arrest refuses upon request of a peace officer to give a specimen designated by
the peace officer as provided by division (H), a specimen may not be taken.
   (P)   A person who is dead, unconscious, or otherwise in a condition
rendering the person incapable of refusal, whether the person is arrested or
not, is deemed not to have withdrawn the consent provided by division (H) of
this section. If the person is dead, a specimen may be withdrawn by the county
medical examiner or the examiner's designated agent or, if there is no county
medical examiner for the county, by a licensed funeral director or a person
authorized as provided by division (I) of this section. If the person is not
dead but is incapable of refusal, a specimen may be withdrawn by a person
authorized as provided by division (I) of this section. Evidence of alcohol
concentration or the presence of a controlled substance, controlled substance
analogue, or drug obtained by an analysis authorized by this division is
admissible in a civil or criminal action.
   (Q)   A peace officer shall require a person to give a specimen if:
      (1)   The officer arrests the person for an offense under Tex. Penal Code
§ 19.05(2)(a) or this section;
      (2)   The person is the operator of a vessel involved in an accident that
the officer reasonably believes occurred as a result of the offense;
      (3)   At the time of the arrest the officer reasonably believes that a
person has died or will die as a direct result of the accident; and
      (4)   The person refuses the officer's request to give a specimen
voluntarily.
(Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.097) ('68 Code, § 17-58) (Ord. passed 8-11-
64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.097 CARRYING LIQUOR.
   No person operating or occupying a boat or other craft on Lake Pat Cleburne
shall permit same to carry intoxicating liquor.
('68 Code, § 17-59) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.098 USE FOR COMMERCIAL FISHING OR TAKING GAME.
   No person shall use of operate a boat or other craft on Lake Pat Cleburne
for the purpose of catching and taking fish or game for market or sale, except
for the removal of rough fish as directed by the City Council.
('68 Code, § 17-60) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.099 RIDING ON DECKS AND GUNWALES.
   No person operating a motor boat on Lake Pat Cleburne shall allow any person
to ride or sit on the gunwales thereof or on the decking over the bow of the
craft while underway, nor shall any person operating an open motor boat allow
any person to stand in the craft while underway. Nothing in this section shall
be construed to mean that passengers or other persons aboard a boat cannot
stand on the decking over the bow of the boat to moor the boat or to cast off
or for any other necessary purpose.
('68 Code, § 17-61) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.100 OBSTRUCTION OF TRAFFIC LANES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall anchor a boat or other craft for fishing or other purposes
on Lake Pat Cleburne in such a position as to obstruct a passageway ordinarily
used by other boats and craft.
('68 Code, § 17-62) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.101 MOORING TO BUOYS, BEACONS OR SIGNS.
   No person shall at any time moor any boat or other craft to any buoy, beacon
or sign placed on Lake Pat Cleburne by the city, nor shall any person in any
manner hang on with a boat to such buoy, beacon or sign.
('68 Code, § 17-63) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.102 ANCHORING.
   No person shall leave a boat or other craft on Lake Pat Cleburne without
having same dependably fastened to an anchorage, either in the water or upon
the land, or any such boat or other craft must be removed from the water a
sufficient distance to assure that the same will not be caused to float away
from its station because of rising waters.
('68 Code, § 17-64) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.103 OVERLOADING.
   No person owning or operating a boat or other craft on Lake Pat Cleburne
shall permit the came to be occupied by more persons than the rated capacity of
such boat or other craft, nor shall any person owning or operating a craft on
Lake Pat Cleburne permit the same to be loaded with passengers or cargo beyond
its safe capacity, taking into consideration weather and other operating
conditions.
('68 Code, § 17-65) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.104 ACCIDENTS.
   (A)   Duty of operators. The operator of a vessel involved in a collision,
accident, or casualty shall:
      (1)   Render to other persons affected such assistance as may be
practicable and necessary in order to save them from or minimize any danger
insofar as he or she can do so without serious danger to his or her own vessel,
crew, and passengers; and
      (2)   Give his or her name, address, and identification of his or her
vessel in writing to any person injured and to the owner of any property
damaged in the collision, accident, or other casualty.
   (B)   Accident reports.
      (1)   The operator of a vessel involved in a collision, accident, or
other casualty that results in death or injury to a person or damage to
property in excess of $500 shall file with the department on or before the
expiration of 30 days after the incident a full description of the collision,
accident, or casualty in accordance with regulations established by the
department.
      (2)   The accident reports are confidential and are inadmissible in court
as evidence.
      (3)   On request made by an authorized official or agency of the United
States, any information available to the department under division (B)(1) of
this section shall be sent to the official or agency.
(Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code §§ 31.104 and 31.105) ('68 Code, § 17-66) (Ord.
passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.105 REMOVAL OF BOATS FROM LAKE.
   (A)   The City Manager and any police officer may require the removal of any
boat or other craft from Lake Pat Cleburne if:
      (1)   Such boat or other craft is in an unsafe operating condition.
      (2)   Such boat or other craft is in violation of any of the applicable
provisions of this subchapter
   (B)   Any person refusing to, remove any boat or other craft under the
provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('68 Code, § 17-67) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.106 DERELICTS.
   Any boat or other craft found abandoned or adrift on Lake Pat Cleburne, or
any unlicensed boat or other craft thereon, or any boat or other craft, not in
use, found not anchored or grounded in compliance with this subchapter, shall
be deemed to be a derelict, and shall be taken up by the City Manager or any
police officer, and the city shall have a lien thereon for all unpaid license
fees and the expenses of taking, towing and keeping the same, which shall be
done at the owner's risk, and without any liability whatsoever on the part of
the city.
('68 Code, § 17-68) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
Part 3: FISHING
§ 98.115 FISHING — APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW.
   The general laws of the state, as the same are now or as they may hereafter
be amended, save and except as specifically provided through proper ordinances
and regulations passed by the city, will control the taking of fish from Lake
Pat Cleburne.
Penalty, see § 98.999
('68 Code, § 17-79) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
§ 98.116 FISHING PROHIBITED NEAR INTAKE TOWER.
   Fishing shall not be allowed within one-fourth mile of the intake tower.
('68 Code, § 17-80) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.117 PERMITTED FISHING EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful, in Lake Pat Cleburne, for any person to catch,
take, or attempt to catch or take any fish, or possess any fish taken by any
method, means or device, except by ordinary pole and line, rod and reel, fly
rod, throw line equipped with no more than 50 hooks. The use of trotlines is
limited to one trotline per person and no metallic trotlines shall be used. All
trotlines shall have valid bear tags attached within three feet of the first
hook at each end of the trotline. No two trotlines, or more, shall be connected
together in any manner and no trotlines shall be within 200 feet of any boat,
dock or pier, bathing pier, or any place commonly used as a swimming or ski
area. It shall be unlawful for any person to fish for, take, catch or attempt
to catch any fish in the waters of Lake Pat Cleburne, by any net, seine, snag
line, trap, or any other device not herein authorized by this section within
200 yards of the lake shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this
section.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the above provisions, rough fish may be taken with
cast net or legal minnow seine, or with seines and nets the meshes of which are
not less than one inch square, or with wire, rope or gig, but no person shall
possess other fish when using much devices.
('68 Code, § 17-81) (Ord. passed 8-11-64; Am. Ord. 4-1976-17, passed 4-30-76;
Am. Ord. 7-1993-25, passed 7-13-93)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.118 DESTRUCTION OF ABANDONED OR UNLAWFUL EQUIPMENT.
   Any net, seine, snag line, trap, float, trotline of metal or any trotline
left unattended for 30 or more days, or any other device found in the waters of
Lake Pat Cleburne, in violation of this subchapter, is declared to be a
nuisance, and it shall be the duty of any police officer to destroy the same
whenever found, and no suit shall be maintained against him therefor.
('68 Code, § 17-82) (Ord. passed 8-11-64; Am. Ord. 7-1993-25, passed 7-13-93)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.119 PROHIBITED BAIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any game fish or fresh water
rough fish, including fish commonly known as gold fish and carp, as bait in
Lake Pat Cleburne, except that such fish may be cut up and used as cut bait.
('68 Code, § 17-83) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.120 COMMERCIAL FISHING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or buy, or to offer to. sell or
buy, or take or possess, for commercial purposes, fish from the waters of Lake
Pat Cleburne.
('68 Code, § 17-84) (Ord. passed 8-11-64)
Penalty, see § 98.999
Part 4: PIERS AND BOATHOUSES
§ 98.125 APPLICATION OF BUILDING CODE.
   Piers, docks, and boathouses at the lake are “structures,” as that term is
used in the city’s building code set forth in
Chapter 150 of this code, and persons desiring to construct them shall comply
in all respects with such code.
(‘68 Code, § 17-95) (Ord. passed 8-11-64; Am. Ord. 11-2021-65, passed 11-9-21)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.126 GENERAL ISSUES AFFECTING BOAT DOCKS/LAKE ACCESS SITES.
   No pier, dock, or boathouse will be permitted to be built on the lake that
adversely impacts the water quality, or the general use and activities on Lake
Pat Cleburne. As such, due care and diligence shall be exercised by the City
Council of the City of Cleburne in considering requested permits for any pier,
dock, or boathouse in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 11-2021-65, passed 11-9-21)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.127 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall keep, maintain, erect, construct, enlarge, alter, or move
any pier, dock, or boathouse, or any combination of such structures on the Lake
Pat Cleburne Reservoir Area, nor shall any person cause any of said acts to be
done, without first obtaining a permit for such structure.
(‘68 Code, § 17-112) (Ord. passed 8-11-64; Am. Ord. 11-2021-65, passed 11-9-21
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.128 PIER, DOCK, AND BOATHOUSE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   The following is required for consideration of a pier, dock, or boathouse
permit:
   (A)   A land use easement or license agreement allowing for the use of the
land on which the structure is to be placed.
   (B)   A survey prepared by a State of Texas registered land surveyor showing
the water frontage of the lot subject to the permit application, mean high or
ordinary water lines, property lines, and the width of waterway.
   (C)   Plans showing the height, width, and length of all proposed structures
to include pilings, boat lifts, platforms, pavilions, detail and construction
specifications, and all other information deemed necessary by the Building
Official to properly evaluate the plan. The design, construction, alteration,
and repair of the pier, dock, or boathouse shall conform to the provisions of
this chapter as amended or superseded from time to time. Pile dimensions,
spacing, and embedment shall be designed according to best engineering
practices. Materials used in the construction of a pier, dock, or boathouse
shall be made of nontoxic, nonpollutant materials which will not harm the
environment.
(‘68 Code, §§ 17-98, 17-99, 17-100) (Ord. passed 8-11-64; Am. Ord. 11-2021-65,
passed 11-9-21)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.129 ISSUANCE OF A PERMIT.
   The issuance of all pier, dock, or boathouse permits will be upon the review
and approval of the City Council.
(‘68 Code, § 17-115) (Ord. passed 8-11-64; Am. Ord. 11-2021-65, passed 11-9-21)
§ 98.130 EXISTING NON-CONFORMING DOCKS, PIERS, AND BOATHOUSES.
   Where a lawful pier, dock, or boathouse exists at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this subchapter that could not be built under the
terms of this subchapter, such structure may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   No such non-conforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way
which increases its non-conformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be
altered to decrease its non-conformity or to comply with city building codes.
   (B)   Should such non-conforming structure or non-conforming portion of a
structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50% of its
replacement cost at time of destruction; it shall not be reconstructed except
in conformity with the provisions of this subchapter, or when approved by the
City Council.
   (C)   Should such structure be moved any distance for any reason whatsoever,
it shall thereafter conform to the regulations.
(Ord. 11-2021-65, passed 11-9-21)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.131 MAINTENANCE OF PIERS, DOCKS, AND BOATHOUSES.
   All pier, dock, or boathouse structures will be maintained in good repair
and in satisfactory condition so as not to be a nuisance, not to adversely
affect the aesthetic appeal of the lake, not to be detrimental or potentially
detrimental to the water quality, and not to be unsafe for use. Whether a
structure is in good repair and satisfactory condition shall be determined by
the Building Official and/or a city representative. If repairs are required,
the time allowed to make the required repairs to bring the boat dock/lake
access structure into good repair and in satisfactory condition will be
determined by the Building Official and/or a city representative and provided
in writing to the owner.
(Ord. 11-2021-65, passed 11-9-21)
Penalty, see § 98.999
§ 98.132 REMOVAL OF UNPERMITTED PIERS, DOCKS, AND BOATHOUSES.
   Any pier, dock, or boathouse not permitted or maintained or repaired in
accordance with §
98.131, as required by this subchapter shall be removed by the owner within 30
days after the service of written notice by the city to remove same. If such
structure is not removed within the 30-day period, the city may remove, or
cause to be removed, all or any part of the structure at the owner’s expense,
and no further permit shall be issued for any such structure appurtenant to the
property which was served by such removed structure, until the city has been
reimbursed for such removal expense.
(‘68 Code, § 17-117) (Ord. passed 8-11-64; Am. Ord. 11-2021-65, passed 11-9-21)
Penalty, see § 98.999
GOLF COURSE
§ 98.200 GENERAL RULES.
   General rules shall be determined prior to the golf course opening to the
public.
(Ord. 03-2009-17, passed 3-10-09)
§ 98.201 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Hours of operation shall be determined prior to the golf course opening to
the public.
(Ord. 03-2009-17, passed 3-10-09)
§ 98.202 FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   The Cleburne Golf Links fee structure is established as follows. Sales
tax will be applied where applicable.
GREENS FEES
   Weekday base rate                                                         $42
   Weekend/holiday base rate                                                 $49
   Includes power cart fee
STANDARD DISCOUNTS
   Senior 55 and over - active military - veteran discount                   20%
   Twilight discount                                                         25%
   Junior discount                                                           50%
MEMBERSHIP PACKAGES - All are valid for 12 months from the date of purchase and are
non-transferable
   Bronze membership                                                         $1,500
      Includes 50 rounds of golf, Monday - Friday, excluding holidays and  
tournaments
      Standard discounts apply
   Silver membership                                                         $2,200
      Unlimited rounds of golf, Monday - Friday, excluding holidays and    
tournaments
      Standard discounts apply                                             
   Gold membership                                                           $2,550
      Unlimited rounds of golf, excluding tournaments                      
      Standard discounts apply                                             
All other rates and fees at the Cleburne Golf Links will be at the discretion and
consideration of the City Manager and the Director of Parks and Recreation.
 
   (B)   The City Manager shall be authorized to set or negotiate rates for
groups, tournaments and special events, and to set other fees not otherwise
specified.
(Ord. 03-2009-17, passed 3-10-09; Am. Ord. 07-2009-44, passed 7-28-09; Am. Ord.
10-2009-65, passed 10-13-09; Am. Ord. 10-2010-59, passed 10-12-10; Am. Ord. 03-
2011-08, passed 3-22-11; Am. Ord. 10- 2011-55, passed 10-11-11; Am. Ord. 08-
2014-72, passed 8-26-14; Am. Ord. 10-2014-86, passed 10-14-14; Am. Ord. 12-
2019-76, passed 12-10- 19; Am. Ord. 01-2023-01, passed 1-10-23) Penalty, see §
98.999
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON COMMUNITY AND RECREATION CENTER
§ 98.300 GENERAL RULES.
   General rules shall be established prior to the Center opening to the
public.
(Ord. 03-2009-18, passed 3-10-09)
§ 98.301 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Hours/days of operation shall be set as recommended by the Board of
Directors.
   (B)   Facility rooms are available outside of normal hours of operation
until 10:00 p.m. for meetings, classes or special events through a rental
agreement two weeks prior to desired date at Recreation Center with the city
Parks and Recreation Division.
(Ord. 03-2009-18, passed 3-10-09)
§ 98.302 FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   The Recreation Center fee schedule is established as follows:
   BOOKER T. WASHINGTON COMMUNITY AND RECREATION CENTER
   Facility Fee Schedule
   User fees
Daily admission - all ages                  $2 per day
Annual recreation pass                       
   15 years and under                    $ 1 per person per month
   16 - 54 years                         $10 per person per month
   55+ years                             $ 5 per person per month
   Rental fees
   Banquet hall                           
      Full room                       $35 per hour
         Non-profit/civic          $30 per hour
      Full room with kitchen (full ser$45 per hour
         Non-profit/civic          $40 per hour
      After hours of operation        $25 additional per hour
      Deposit                         $100 per rental contract
      Deposit with kitchen            $200 per rental contract
   Gymnasium                              
      Half court                      $25 per hour
      Full court                      $40 per hour
      Gymnasium special event*        $100 per hour
         Non-profit/civic          $75 per hour
      After hours of operation        $60 additional per hour
      Deposit for gym                 $100 per rental contract
      Deposit with kitchen            $200 per rental contract
      Kitchen                         $35 per hour
         Non-profit/civic          $25 per hour
      Kitchen deposit                 $100 per rental contract
* 2-hour rental minimum, includes 72 inch round or 6 foot tables, 400 banquet
chairs
 
   (B)   The City Manager shall be authorized to set or negotiate rates for
groups and special events and to set other fees that are yet to be determined.
(Ord. 03-2009-18, passed 3-10-09; Am. Ord. 12-2014-99, passed 12-9-14; Am. Ord.
03-2017-23, passed 3-28-17)
WINSTON PATRICK McGREGOR PARK
§ 98.400 GENERAL RULES.
   General rules shall be determined prior to the Park opening to the public.
(Ord. 04-2009-28, passed 4-28-09)
§ 98.401 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The hours of operation of the Park shall be 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. seven
days a week.
(Ord. 04-2009-28, passed 4-28-09)
§ 98.402 FEE SCHEDULE; PARK HOUSE GENERAL RULES.
   (A)   Park House hours of operation shall be 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. seven
days a week.
   (B)   The fee schedule is as follows:
WINSTON PATRICK McGREGOR PARK
Fee Schedule
WINSTON PATRICK McGREGOR PARK
Fee Schedule
Time Session                            Fee Schedule
Morning session
4 hours (8:00 a.m. to noon)             $50 per 4-hour session
Afternoon session
4 hours (1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m.         $50 per 4-hour session
Middle block that spans morning and
afternoon
4 hours                                 $75 per 4-hour session
                                        Example: 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.;
                                        11:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
                                        luncheon meeting, etc.
After hours and weekends
(After 5:00 p.m. and weekends)          $25 per hour with 2-hour minimum
Botanical or horticultural groups       No charge
                                        (Groups must have prior approval as
(For events that are for public         being an approved botanical/
education involving botanical programs/ horticultural group or organization.
meetings)                               Groups are required to set up and take
                                        down tables and chairs/ clean up after
                                        use.)
 
   (C)   Park House general rules:
      (1)   There shall be a 10:00 p.m. curfew.
      (2)   Any event serving alcohol will require off-duty Cleburne police.
      (3)   There is no allowance or reduction of fees for non-profit
organizations.
      (4)   Rental group size is limited to no more than 35 individuals.
   (D)   The City Manager shall be authorized to set or negotiate rates for
groups and special events and to set other fees that are yet to be determined.
(Ord. 04-2009-28, passed 4-28-09)
CLEBURNE SPORTS COMPLEX
§ 98.500 GENERAL RULES.
   General rules shall be established prior to the Complex opening to the
public.
(Ord. 03-2010-12, passed 3-9-10)
§ 98.501 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Hours of operation shall be seasonal based on varied sports season
schedules.
(Ord. 03-2010-12, passed 3-9-10)
§ 98.502 RENTAL FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   (1)   Local baseball, soccer and football associations shall be
contracted to conduct sporting events in their associated programs. All events
and tournaments hosted or sponsored by the associations or other groups shall
use the following fee schedule for rental of the facility:
 
BASEBALL FIELDS (GAMES ONLY)
One or two fields (8:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m.)        $400 per day
Each additional field                           $200 per day
Additional field set-up (i.e., building mounds) $100 per field
Field lighting                                  $25 per hour per field
Field lighting (Practice)                       $12.50 per hour per half field
Additional labor for extended hours             $25 per hour
 
 
FOOTBALL AND SOCCER FIELDS (GAMES ONLY)
One, two or three fields (8:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m.) $400 per day
Additional field set-up (i.e., moving goals,    $100 per field
painting fields)
Each additional field                           $80 per day
Field lighting                                  $25 per hour per field
Field lighting (Practice)                       $12.50 per hour per half field
Additional labor for extended hours             $25 per hour
 
      (2)   Local baseball, soccer, and football associations shall be allowed
to conduct camps and clinics at the facility for their associated programs. A
fee of $5 per participant will be charged per event, and the event shall not
exceed 32 hours in duration.
      (3)   Local baseball, soccer, and football associations shall be allowed
to conduct try-outs and sign-ups at the facility for their associated programs.
A fee of $25 per hour per staff member will be charged to the association per
occurrence.
   (B)   All advertising and sponsorship banners or signage must be removed
each day at the conclusion of the scheduled event. 4B will not be responsible
for damaged or missing signage. Signage that is not removed will be discarded
without notice.
   (C)   The City Manager shall be authorized to set other fees and/or hours
that are yet to be determined.
(Ord. 03-2010-12, passed 3-9-10; Am. Ord. 02-2014-14, passed 2-25-14; Am. Ord.
12-2014-102, passed 12-18-14; Am. Ord. 10-2015-73, passed 10-27-15)
DON MOORE PARK AND CARVER PARK
§ 98.600 GENERAL RULES.
   General rules shall be determined prior to Don Moore Park and Carver Park
opening to the public.
(Ord. 10-2010-60, passed 10-12-10)
§ 98.601 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Hours of operation for Don Moore Park and Carver Park shall be 7:00 a.m. to
12:00 a.m. (midnight) seven days a week.
(Ord. 10-2010-60, passed 10-12-10)
§ 98.602 FEE SCHEDULE.
   The fee schedule for Don Moore Park and Carver Park is hereby established as
follows:
   (A)   A fee of $35 per hour for use of the lights is hereby established.
   (B)   A tournament fee of $150 per day for use of the field including lining
fields, prepping areas, dragging, and the like plus light fee is hereby
established.
   (C)   A fee of $300 per team per season for use of field plus light fee for
adult softball leagues is hereby established.
(Ord. 10-2010-60, passed 10-12-10; Am. Ord. 03-2017-24, passed 3-28-17)
§ 98.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
other penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty set forth in §
10.99.
   (B)   Violation of §
98.005 is a misdemeanor and upon conviction a person shall be fined an amount
not in excess of $500 for each offense, and each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 6-2002-36, passed 6-11-02)
   (C)   Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates
any of the provisions of §
98.030 through
98.034 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
fined not to exceed $500 for each offense. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 10-2000-51, passed 10-10-00; Am. Ord. 08-2010-48, passed 8-10- 10; Am.
Ord. 10-2015-72, passed 10-27-15)
   (D)   Any person convicted of violating §
98.053 by not observing the restricted zone, shall be fined not less than $10
nor more than $100. Should there be a second violation, the fine shall be the
same, with the additional provision that any lake permit held by such person
may be revoked.
('68 Code, § 17-10(c)) (Ord. passed 6-16-67)
   (E)   Any person, firm, corporation, agent, or employee thereof who violates
any of the provisions of §§
98.026,
98.027 or
98.202 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
fined not to exceed $500 for each offense. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   (F)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of §
98.074 shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $500 for all violations.
Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
   (G)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of
the provisions of §
98.502 shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense. Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 03-2005-20, passed 3-8-05; Am. Ord. 06-2009-35, passed 6-23-09; Am. Ord.
07-2009-44, passed 7-28-09; Am. Ord. 03-2011-08, passed 3- 22-11; Am. Ord. 04-
2011-19, passed 4-28-11; Am. Ord. 04-2011-20, passed 4-28-11; Am. Ord. 10-2015-
73, passed 10-27-15)
CHAPTER 99: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
99.01   Certain ordinances relating to streets saved from repeal
   
99.02   Adoption of state law relative to street improvements
   
99.03   Hearing on street improvement assessments
   
99.04   Interfering with street improvement work
   
99.05   Property owners to maintain sidewalks
   
99.06   Obstructions prohibited
   
99.07   Obstruction by trees, hedges or shrubs
   
99.08   Display of goods, wares and merchandise on sidewalks
   
99.09   Awnings over sidewalks
   
99.10   Dumping or spilling of loads prohibited; remedies; exceptions
Construction and Repair of Sidewalks, Driveways and the like
   
99.20   Definitions
   
99.21   Purpose
   
99.22   Application
   
99.23   Permit
   
99.24   Special permission for construction of commercial driveway
   
99.25   Special permission for installation of setback
   
99.26   Contractor's bond
   
99.27   Lines and grades
   
99.28   Specifications
   
99.29   Occupancy of street with materials and equipment; barricades
   
99.30   Approval of work
   
99.31   Maintenance of setback area
   
99.32   Replacement of obsolete setbacks
   
99.33   Replacement of obsolete driveways
Street Excavations
   
99.40   Definitions
   
99.41   Boring and tunnelling
   
99.42   Permit required
   
99.43   Permit fees
   
99.44   Restoring the surface
   
99.45   Minimum depth of utility pipes below city-owned property
 
   
99.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Animals, see
Ch. 91
   Authority of city relative to streets and sidewalks, see Charter §§
2.3 and
2.4
   Building lines for business structures on certain streets, see §
150.001
   Loudspeakers on or near streets, see §
130.05
   Peddling on streets and sidewalks, see §
116.01
   Railroads, see
Ch. 73
   Soliciting alms on streets, see §
116.02
   Street numbers for houses, see §
150.004
   Street parade tax for circuses, see §
111.01
   Street rental charge for taxicabs and buses, see §§
117.05 and
117.37
   Streets and sidewalks in subdivisions, see §§
154.080 et seq.
   Traffic Code, see
Title VII
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 99.01 CERTAIN ORDINANCES RELATING TO STREETS SAVED FROM REPEAL.
   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be deemed to
affect the validity of any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing,
locating-relocating, opening, paving, widening, or vacating any street or
public way in the city, or any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for
streets or public ways, or any ordinance relating to municipal street
maintenance agreements with the state. Such ordinances are on file in the City
Clerk's office and are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect
to the same extent as if set out at length herein.
('68 Code, § 25-1)
§ 99.02 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW RELATIVE TO STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
   An election held on July, 12, 1924, resulted in the acceptance of the
provisions and benefits and the adoption of chapter 11, title 22, Revised
Statutes of Texas of 1911, relating to street improvements, presently being
Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 1086 through 1096, and 1104 and 1105, which shall be
in full force and effect in the city.
('68 Code, § 25-2)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.03 HEARING ON STREET IMPROVEMENT ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   On the day at the time stated in the notice given pursuant to Tex.
Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 1093, any person, firm, corporation or association
interested in any property that may be claimed to be subject to assessment for
the purpose of paying the cost of any improvement or any part thereof, made
pursuant to §
99.02, including any railroad or street railroad against the properties of
which and/or the owner of which an assessment is proposed, shall be entitled to
and shall be afforded a full and fair hearing before the City Council as to all
matters offending the property or any claim of personal liability or objection
to any irregularity or invalidity of any of the proceedings with reference to
the making of the improvement, or any other objection thereto, and at such time
such owner shall have the right to contest any assessment proposed to be levied
and any personal liability, the regularity of the proceedings with reference to
the improvement and the benefit of the improvement to his property, and no
assessment shall be made against the owner of any abutting property or against
his property in any event, in excess of the benefit to such owner in the
enhanced value of his property by means of such improvement, as ascertained at
such hearing.
   (B)   At the hearing provided for above, all persons making objections shall
be afforded opportunity to appear in person and/or by representative or
attorney, and produce evidence, and the hearing may be adjourned from time to
time by the City Council until fully completed, and the City Council shall
inquire into and determine all such objections.
('68 Code, § 25-3)
Statutory reference:
   Council to adopt rules providing for hearings to property owners relative to
street improvement assessments, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 1094.
§ 99.04 INTERFERING WITH STREET IMPROVEMENT WORK.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or obstruct the making or
repairing of any sidewalk, crosswalk or pavement which is being made under
authority of the City Council or to hinder or obstruct any person employed to
make or repair any public improvement ordered by the City Council.
('68 Code, § 25-4)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.05 PROPERTY OWNERS TO MAINTAIN SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be the duty and obligation of all owners, occupants and users of
real property abutting upon streets within the jurisdiction of the city, at
their own cost and expense, to maintain and keep the public sidewalks bordering
their property in a safe and adequate condition, free of vegetation and debris,
so that they are easily accessible to and may be free and safely used by the
public for travel. It shall also be the duty and obligation of all owners,
occupants and users of real property abutting upon streets within the
jurisdiction of the city to repair or replace any portion of public sidewalk
that is damaged or removed by said owners, occupants and users of such real
property.
(‘68 Code, § 25-5) (Am. Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18) Penalty, see §
99.99
Cross-reference:
   Liability of city for damages resulting from streets and sidewalks being out
of repair, see Charter §
2.10
§ 99.06 OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company, or corporation to
obstruct or cause to be obstructed any street, avenue, alley, or sidewalk
within the jurisdiction of the city with vehicles, recreational equipment,
construction equipment, boxes, lumber, timber, firewood, brush, vegetation,
posts, awnings, signs, or other items, substances or materials, in any manner
whatsoever.
   (B)   Upon finding an obstruction prohibited by this section, a police
officer, code enforcement officer, or other employee of the city may remove the
obstruction or cause the obstruction to be removed from the street, avenue,
alley, or sidewalk and dispose of the obstruction.
(‘68 Code, § 25-6) (Am. Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30,
passed 4-25-23) Penalty, see §
99.99
Cross-reference:
   Obstruction of crossings by railroads, see §
73.02
§ 99.07 OBSTRUCTION BY TREES, HEDGES OR SHRUBS.
   (A)   Any condition maintained in violation of this section is hereby deemed
a public nuisance, and, in addition to any other remedy or enforcement option
available under the law, the city may pursue the abatement of the condition as
provided under Chapter 96 of this code.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company, or corporation to
allow a tree, tree limb, or tree branch to be lower than 14 feet above the
surface of any street, avenue, or alley within the jurisdiction of the city.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company, or corporation to
allow a tree, tree limb, or tree branch to be lower than eight feet above the
surface of any sidewalk within the jurisdiction of the city.
   (D)   Property owners shall maintain a driver's line of sight zone parallel
to the roadway for a horizontal distance of 15 feet from the edge of the
roadway and a vertical clearance that extends from three feet above the surface
of the roadway to eight feet above the curb line. Trees growing in the driver's
line of sight zone shall be at least ten feet from other trees in the driver's
line of sight zone.
   (E)   Property owners shall maintain a driver's line of sight zone at all
corners of street-to-street intersections. The driver's line of sight zone
shall be in the shape of a horizontal triangle created by measuring 25 feet
from the intersection in perpendicular directions along the curb line or edge
of the roadway. The driver's line of sight zone shall have a vertical clearance
that extends from three feet above the surface of the roadway to eight feet
above the curb line.
(‘68 Code, § 25-7) (Am. Ord. 02-2012-04, passed 2-14-12; Am. Ord. 11-2018-96,
passed 11-27-18) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.08 DISPLAY OF GOODS, WARES AND MERCHANDISE ON SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any merchant, trader, broker, or other person to
use more than one-third of any sidewalk within the jurisdiction of the city for
the display of goods, wares, or merchandise, provided such merchant, trader,
broker, or other person shall remove all merchandise from such sidewalk each
night.
(‘68 Code, § 25-8) (Am. Ord. passed 7-13-71; Am. Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-
18) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.09 AWNINGS OVER SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company, or corporation to
suspend or put up any awning within the jurisdiction of the city:
      (1)    Less than seven feet above any sidewalk; or
      (2)   Within 18 inches of the any curb line.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company, or corporation to
hang any sign on an awning that hangs below the lowest fixed portion of the
awning.
(‘68 Code, § 25-9) (Ord. passed 3-15-55; Am. Ord. passed 4-12-55; Am. Ord. 11-
2018-96, passed 11-27-18) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.10 DUMPING OR SPILLING OF LOADS PROHIBITED; REMEDIES; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person,
willfully or negligently, to dump, deposit, leak, drip, spill or throw, or to
cause or permit the dumping, depositing, leaking, dropping, spilling or
throwing, of any sand, gravel, concrete, water or any other fluid, dirt, mud,
rock, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance, in or upon any
part or portion of any street, highway, alley or other public thoroughfare, or
in or upon any part or portion of any private road or driveway, within the
corporate limits of the city, from any part or portion of any motor or other
vehicle in or upon any part or portion of such thoroughfare or way, in any
quantity sufficient to constitute a hazard or imminent danger to the safety or
health of persons or vehicles using any part or portion of any such
thoroughfare or way, or to be injurious or detrimental to any part or portion
of any such thoroughfare or way.
   (B)   Where any person has violated the provisions of this section by
unlawfully dumping, depositing, leaking, dropping, spilling or throwing or by
unlawfully causing or permitting the dumping, depositing, leaking, dropping,
spilling or throwing of any such sand, gravel, concrete, water or any other
fluid, dirt, mud, rock, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or other substance in
or upon any part or portion of any such street, highway, alley or public
thoroughfare, or in or upon any part of portion of any such private road or
driveway, the owner or lessee of any such vehicle from which the same was so
dumped, deposited, leaked, dropped, spilled or thrown shall forthwith collect
and remove the same from any such street, highway, alley or other thoroughfare,
or private road or driveway, upon learning of the presence and location of
same, and it shall be unlawful for the owner or lessee of the vehicle from
which the same was dumped, deposited, leaked, dropped, spilled or thrown to
fail or refuse to collect and remove the same forthwith upon actual notice of
the presence and location of same given to any such owner or lessee by any
officer or employee of the city.
   (C)   The provisions set forth and contained in divisions (A) and (B) of
this section shall have no application to the dumping, depositing or pouring of
any substance or material necessary and essential to the construction or repair
of any part or portion of any such thoroughfare, or any structure or facility
thereon, at the site thereof.
   (D)   As used herein, the words “motor vehicle,” “street,” “highway,”
“private road,” “private driveway” shall have the definitions and meanings
prescribed for them as contained and set forth in Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art.
6701d. [See also §
70.01 of this code of ordinances.]
('68 Code, § 25-10) (Ord. 12-1974-47, passed 12-10-74)
Penalty, see § 99.99
CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAYS AND THE LIKE
§ 99.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL DRIVEWAY. Any driveway into a place of business which serves or
is served by automobile traffic, including (but without limitation) filling
stations and warehouses, shall be classified as a commercial driveway.
   CONTRACTOR. The person, partnership, corporation or other entity, which
undertakes or contracts to construct driveways, sidewalks, curbs and gutters,
paving, and setbacks in city streets and alleys.
   OWNER. The property owner, individual or firm, having the work done by the
contractor.
   SETBACK. That additional area formed by setting the curb back from the
regular curb alignment towards the property line to obtain a more convenient
parking space in the street abutting a commercial establishment. In no case
shall a setback be constructed where the additional depth obtained is less than
eight feet.
('68 Code, § 25-20) (Ord. passed 4-12-55)
§ 99.21 PURPOSE.
   It is the intent and purpose of this subchapter to protect the public safety
and general welfare by setting up a standard of quality and workmanship in the
construction and repair of curbs and gutters, sidewalks, driveways, paving and
setbacks in city streets, alleys and public ways.
('68 Code, § 25-21) (Ord. passed 4-12-55)
§ 99.22 APPLICATION.
   This subchapter shall apply to the construction and repair of curbs and
gutters, sidewalks, driveways and setbacks in city streets and alleys, and
shall not apply to such construction or repair on private property.
('68 Code, § 25-22) (Ord. passed 4-12-55)
§ 99.23 PERMIT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, reconstruct or
repair any sidewalk, setback, driveway, curb, gutter, or work incident
thereto,in the streets and alleys of the city without first obtaining a permit
for such work from the Public Works Department. Applications for such permits
shall be made on forms furnished by the city. A permit fee of $15 shall be paid
by the applicant at the time application is made.
   (B)   No permit issued under this section shall be assigned, transferred or
sublet. The permittee shall remain in personal charge of all work done
thereunder.
   (C)   A permit issued to any contractor who shall sublet, transfer or assign
his contract or permit any other to have control of such work is subject to
immediate revocation and the Director of Public Works or his designee is hereby
authorized to order that all work issued under such permit immediately cease.
('68 Code, § 25-23) (Ord. passed 4-12-55; Am. Ord. 6-1993-21, passed 6-24-93)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.24 CONSTRUCTION AND RECONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   All driveway construction and reconstruction shall comply with “City of
Cleburne Driveway Standards” and the “Standard Driveway Detail” contained in §
154.088.
('68 Code, § 25-24) (Ord. passed 4-12-55; Am. Ord. 6-1993-21, passed 6-24-93)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.25 SPECIAL PERMISSION FOR INSTALLATION OF SETBACK.
   A setback may be installed only by special permission of the City Engineer.
Request for such permission shall be made by the owner in writing, accompanied
by a sketch indicating the work to be done.
('68 Code, § 25-25) (Ord. passed 4-12-55)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.26 CONTRACTOR'S BOND.
   The contractor desiring to construct any of the improvements covered by this
subchapter shall execute a bond in the sum of $2,000, which bond shall be a
surety company bond made payable to the Mayor and his successor in office, to
be approved by the Mayor and filed with the City Secretary, conditioned that
the principal in the bond shall faithfully comply with all the requirements of
the ordinances of the city regulating the building of sidewalks, curb and
gutter, steps, or driveways and will repair, free of cost, any sidewalk,
curbing, gutter, steps or driveways built by such person that may become
defective, within one year from the date of completion, due to defective
workmanship or materials. Contractor shall repair all damages to public
infrastructure including streets, traffic signal loops, storm drainage, water
and sewer lines, etc. that may be damaged during construction of improvements
covered by this subchapter and will within one year from date of repair, repair
free of charge areas that may become defective due to materials or workmanship.
('68 Code, § 25-26) (Ord. passed 4-12-55; Am. Ord. 05-2009-29, passed 5-26-09)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.27 LINES AND GRADES.
   The City Engineer shall furnish information and set stakes establishing
lines and grades for the construction, reconstruction or repair of any
improvement covered by this subchapter, within four working days after a permit
has been granted for such construction, and all such construction shall be in
accord with such lines and grades.
('68 Code, § 25-27) (Ord. passed 4-12-55)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.28 SPECIFICATIONS.
   All work performed under a permit issued pursuant to this subchapter, and
all materials used therein, shall comply with the specifications therefor set
out in section 10 of the ordinance, upon which this subchapter is based,
adopted by the City Council on April 12, 1955, a copy of which is on file in
the City Clerk's office. No deviation from such specifications shall be made
without written authority from the City Engineer.
('68 Code, § 25-28) (Ord. passed 4-12-55)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.29 OCCUPANCY OF STREET WITH MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT; BARRICADES.
   No more than one-third of the width of the street shall be occupied by
materials, equipment or tools used in the construction or repair of any
improvement subject to the provisions of this subchapter, and barricades shall
be placed around such equipment so as to leave at least two-thirds of such
street open for traffic. Such barricades and street obstructions shall be
supplied with lights at night so that the same will serve as protection to the
public.
('68 Code, § 25-29) (Ord. passed 4-12-55)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.30 APPROVAL OF WORK.
   All work and construction performed pursuant to a permit issued under this
subchapter shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
('68 Code, § 25-30) (Ord. passed 4-12-55)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.31 MAINTENANCE OF SETBACK AREA.
   The property owner shall be required to maintain a setback area constructed
under this subchapter in a clean, presentable condition at his own expense. In
case the setback area is not maintained properly, the owner may be required by
the City Council to remove the setback within a reasonable length of time and
replace it with a standard curb and gutter and, where necessary, a sidewalk,
all at his own expense.
('68 Code, § 25-31) (Ord. passed 4-12-55)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.32 REPLACEMENT OF OBSOLETE SETBACKS.
   In case a setback, due to development of the abutting property, has become
obsolete and of no further use to the property, the owner may be required by
the City Council to remove such setback and replace it with a standard curb and
gutter and where necessary, a sidewalk, all at his own expense.
('68 Code, § 25-32) (Ord. passed 4-12-55)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.33 REPLACEMENT OF OBSOLETE DRIVEWAYS.
   In case a driveway, due to development of the abutting property, has become
obsolete and of no further use to the property, the owner may be required by
the City Council to remove such driveway and replace it with a standard curb
and gutter and, where necessary, a sidewalk, all at his own expense.
('68 Code, § 25-33) (Ord. passed 4-12-55)
Penalty, see § 99.99
STREET EXCAVATIONS
§ 99.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The person employed by the city as such and
appointed by the City Manager.
   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity of any size in a surface, the
boring or tunnelling under a surface or the disruption or breaking of a
surface.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, business entity or organization of any kind. This term shall not
include the city.
   STREET. The surface of and the space above and below any public street,
road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way, ground or place, sidewalk,
alley, boulevard, parkway, drive, street right-of-way or easement now or
hereafter held by the city for a public purpose.
('68 Code, § 25-44) (Ord. 5-1979-25, passed 5-8-79)
Cross-reference:
   Protection of street excavations made during construction work, see §
150.003
§ 99.41 BORING AND TUNNELLING.
   When an excavation is planned to be made in an improved street, such
excavation shall be accomplished only by boring or tunnelling under such street
where feasible or practicable. The Director of Public Works shall make the
determination of feasibility or practicality before a permit is issued.
('68 Code, § 25-45) (Ord. 5-1979-26, passed 5-8-79)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.42 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall make an excavation in or under a street without first
obtaining an effective and valid permit to do so from the Director of Public
Works or his designated representative.
   (B)   Any person desiring a permit shall apply for such at least 24 hours
before the commencement of any work. A permit is not effective and valid until
it is signed by the Director of Public Works or his designated representative.
   (C)   The work for which a permit is issued shall be commenced within 30
days of the effective date of the permit. In the event that special,
exceptional or unusual circumstances prevent the commencement of the work
within the initial 30-day period, the holder of the permit may apply for a time
extension before the expiration of the initial time period, and the Director of
Public Works may approve the same; provided, that no time extension shall
exceed 30 days. If such work is not commenced with the initial time period or
any extension thereof, the permit shall be null and void.
   (D)   Any person making an excavation in or under a street without an
effective and valid permit shall cease all excavation work when ordered to do
so by the Director of Public Works or his designated representative and shall
not resume such work until he has complied with this subchapter.
   (E)   Division (A) of this section shall not apply to emergency situations
where excavations are needed immediately to correct or remove a situation which
presents an immediate and imminent threat to the health, safety and welfare of
the public. However, in these situations, the person making the excavation
shall apply for and obtain an effective and valid permit from the designated
official on the next working day.
   (F)   Division (A) shall not apply to the following excavations made in that
portion of a street between the right-of-way line and curb or edge of an
improved roadway:
      (1)   Excavations made by a resident or owner of the abutting property or
a holder of some other valid type of permit issued by the city;
      (2)   Excavations made for the placement of utility poles and guy anchors
by a utility company which is operating under a franchise agreement with the
city; and
      (3)   Excavations made for the installation of utility service drops
where the trench is attended at all times by utility company employees, and the
trench is not in existence for more than one hour.
   (G)   The exceptions mentioned in this subsection apply only to permit
requirements and do not exclude any person from the other requirements
established by this subchapter. Excavations for tunnelling or boring shall
require a permit.
('68 Code, § 25-45.1) (Ord. 5-1979-25, passed 5-8-79)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.43 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   The following fees shall be paid for permits required by §
99.42:
      (1)   For excavations in and under unpaved streets, the permit fee shall
be $3.
      (2)   For excavations in and under paved streets, the permit fee shall be
$5.
   (B)   Any utility company which pays a franchise fee to the city shall not
be required to pay a permit fee.
('68 Code, § 25-46) (Ord. 5-1979-25, passed 5-8-79)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.44 RESTORING THE SURFACE.
   (A)   When an excavation is made in or under any street, the person doing
such work shall restore the street within a reasonable length of time after the
completion of the work to as good a condition as before the commencement of the
work and according to the specifications established by the director of public
works. Any length of time in excess of three days shall be prima facie evidence
that the length of time is not reasonable. In the event that special or unusual
circumstances prevent the restoration of the surface of a street within a
reasonable length of time, the person who made the excavation shall obtain the
Director of Public Works' approval for a time extension and shall maintain the
excavation in a safe and easily traversable condition until the surface is
restored.
   (B)   Any person who has restored or caused to be restored any street
pursuant to this subchapter shall maintain to the satisfaction of the Director
of Public Works for one year the surface of the street.
   (C)   If a person who has made an excavation in or under a street fails to
restore said street within a reasonable length of time and has not obtained a
time extension, or fails to restore said street according to the specifications
prescribed herein, or fails to maintain the street for the length of time
prescribed herein, the Director of Public Works shall notify the person in
writing to properly restore or maintain the street within five days after such
notice. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with such notice.
   (D)   If a person fails to comply with the notice provided for in division
(C), the Director of Public Works may cause the street to be properly restored
or maintained and shall charge said person with the cost of such work. It shall
be unlawful for any person who has failed to comply with said notice to fail to
pay these costs.
   (E)   If the city restores or maintains a street because of the failure of a
person to comply with the requirements of this section, the person shall be
charged with the cost incurred by the city for such work. The Director of
Public Works shall establish a rate schedule for labor, equipment and materials
and shall update the same from time to time. The city's cost shall be computed
according to such schedule.
   (F)   When a person makes or causes to be made an excavation in a street,
the person shall place, erect and maintain an adequate number of warning
devices around said excavation to protect the public until the street is
restored. The type and number of warning devices and the placement of the same
shall conform to the latest edition of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices. No person shall encumber a street for a longer period of time
than shall be reasonably necessary to execute the work. Any length of time in
excess of 30 days shall be prima facie evidence that the length of time is not
reasonable. The Director of Public Works may issue an extension of time only in
special or unusual situations.
   (G)   A person who makes an excavation in an area behind a curb but within a
street right-of-way shall comply with all the requirements, time limits and
guidelines established for excavations in and under streets.
('68 Code, § 25-47) (Ord. 5-1979-25, passed 5-8-79)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.45 MINIMUM DEPTH OF UTILITY PIPES BELOW CITY-OWNED PROPERTY.
   If any person shall place or cause to be placed in any street, alley, public
square or market square, or any park, or on any lot of whatever kind or
character or description which is owned or controlled by the city, any pipes
for the transmission of water, gas, sewerage or electrical current, at a less
depth than 18 inches below the grade level of the street, gutter, lot, alley,
park car square, at the time of laying such pipe, the city shall in no way be
liable or responsible for the displacement or breakage, or for disturbing in
any way whatsoever, the pipes so laid, and the city shall be held free from
indemnity, damage or legal proceedings of any character whatever by reasons of
the failure on the part of such person to lay such pipes to such depth as above
designated.
('68 Code, § 19-7)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.99 PENALTY.
   It is an offense for a person, firm, company, or corporation to violate,
disobey, omit, neglect, or refuse to comply with or resist the enforcement of
any of the provisions of this chapter. Each day that a violation is permitted
to exist shall constitute a separate offense. An offense under this section is
a Class C misdemeanor. Any offense for which no other penalty is set forth in
this chapter shall be subject to the penalty set forth in §
10.99 of this code.
(‘68 Code, § 25-48) (Ord. 5-1979-25, passed 5-8-79; Am. Ord. 5-1979-26, passed
5-8-79; Am. Ord. 7-1991-21, passed 7-25-91; Am. Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-
18)
CHAPTER 100: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
100.01   Definitions
   
100.02   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
100.03   Discrimination in the financing of housing
   
100.04   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services
   
100.05   Exemptions and exclusions
   
100.06   Fair Housing Administrator
   
100.07   Complaints
   
100.08   Investigation
   
100.09   Legal proceedings
   
100.10   Cooperation with Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
   
100.11   Unlawful intimidation
   
100.12   Education and public information
 
   
100.99   Penalty
§ 100.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
100.02 through
100.04.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as,
or designed and intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families
or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction of
location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
   FAMILY. A single individual.
   PERSON. One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations,
labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock
companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, fiduciaries, and any
other organization or entity of whatever character.
   TO RENT. To lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
('68 Code, § 11½-1) (Ord. 2-1979-5, passed 2-13-79)
§ 100.02 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   Except as exempted by section §
100.05, it shall be unlawful:
   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or
to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable
or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, sex, handicap,
familial status, religion or national origin;
   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, sex, handicap,
familial status, religion or national origin;
   (C)   To make, print, publish or cause to be made, printed or published any
notice, statement or advertisement regarding the sale or rental of a dwelling
that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race,
color, sex, handicap, familial status, religion or national origin, or an
intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination;
   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, sex, handicap,
familial status, religion or national origin that any dwelling is not available
for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available;
   (E)   For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit, to induce or to
attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations
regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or
persons of a particular race, color, sex, handicap, familial status, religion
or national origin;
   (F)   For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit, to influence or
to attempt to influence, by any words, acts or failure to act, any seller,
purchaser, landlord or tenant of a dwelling so as to promote the maintenance of
racially segregated housing or so as to retard, obstruct or discourage racially
integrated housing.
('68 Code, § 11½-2) (Ord. 2-1979-5, passed 2-13-79; Am. Ord. 9-1995-34, passed
9-26-95)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.03 DISCRIMINATION IN THE FINANCING OF HOUSING.
   It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business
consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to
deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the
purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a
dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest
rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial
assistance because of the race, color, sex, handicap, familial status, religion
or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him in
connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purpose of such
loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners,
lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which
such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given.
('68 Code, § 11½-3) (Ord. 2-1979-5, passed 2-13-79; Am. Ord. 9-1995-34, passed
9-26-95)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES. 
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to, or membership or
participation in, any multiple listing service, real estate brokers'
organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate in the terms or
conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race,
color, sex, handicap, familial status, religion or national origin.
('68 Code, § 11½-4) (Ord. 2-1979-5, passed 2-13-79; Am. Ord. 9-1995-34, passed
9-26-95)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.05 EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   There shall be exempted from the application of section § 100.02
hereof all transactions involving:
      (1)   The rental of units in dwellings containing living quarters
occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living
independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of
such units as his residence;
      (2)   The rental of a single room in a dwelling containing living
quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than one family if the
person offering such room for rental actually maintains and occupies the
remainder of such dwelling as his residence and not more than four such rooms
are offered.
      (3)   (a)   The sale or rental of any single house by a private
individual who owns such house, provided that:
            1.   The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of
the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real
estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any
person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or
agent of any such broker, agent, salesman or person; and
            2.   The sale is made without the publication, posting or mailing
of any advertisement or written notice in violation of §
100.02(C) of this chapter (this shall not prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow
agents, abstracters, title companies and other such professional assistance as
necessary to perfect or transfer the title); and
            3.   The owner does not own more than three single-family houses at
the time of the sale; and
            4.   The owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or
reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or
any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of,
more than three such single-family houses at any one time.
         (b)   If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of sale or
was not the most recent resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption
granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale
within any 24-month period.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings
which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the
same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in
such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex handicap, familial
status or national origin.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a bona fide private club, not
in fact open to the public, which, as an incident to its primary purpose,
provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose,
from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its members or from
giving preference to its members.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall bar any person from owning and operating
a housing accommodation in which a room or rooms are leased, subleased or
rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation
contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use
of all persons occupying such housing accommodation.
('68 Code, § 11½-5) (Ord. 2-1979-5, passed 2-13-79; Am. Ord. 9-1995-34, passed
9-26-95)
§ 100.06 FAIR HOUSING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Manager shall appoint a qualified city employee to serve as the
Fair Housing Administrator (hereinafter referred to as “Administrator”), who
shall have the responsibility for implementing this chapter.
('68 Code, § 11½-6) (Ord. 2-1979-5, passed 2-13-79)
§ 100.07 COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Any credible person who claims to have been injured by a
discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he will be irrevocably
injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter
referred to a “person aggrieved”) may file a complaint with the Administrator.
Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to
have committed or alleged to be about to commit the discriminatory housing
practice and shall set forth the particulars thereof. The Administrator is
directed to prepare and adopt from time to time standard complaint forms and to
furnish them without charge to any person aggrieved.
   (B)   The Administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral
of complaints from the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to
the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1988, being 42 USC 3601 et
seq., and shall treat such complaints in the same manner as complaints filed
directly by the person aggrieved.
   (C)   If, in the course of any investigation as provided in §
100.08 on a complaint filed with or referred to the Administrator, he shall
receive credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that the
person or persons named in such complaint have committed a discriminatory
housing practice on grounds not stated in such complaint, the administrator may
prepare and file a supplementary complaint upon his own motion and in his own
name; and such supplementary complaint thereafter be treated in the same manner
as an original complaint filed by a person aggrieved.
   (D)   Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the administrator shall
furnish a copy of the same to the person or persons named in the complaint.
   (E)   All complaints filed under divisions (A), (B) and (C) shall be filed
within 60 days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred.
Complaints shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory
housing practice are based. The accused may file an answer to the complaint
against him within 15 days of his receipt of the complaint and, with the leave
of the Administrator, which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable
and fair to do so, may amend his answer at any time. A copy of an amendment to
a complaint or an answer shall be furnished to the opposing party. Both
complaints and answers shall be signed by the persons making them and sworn to
before an officer authorized to administer oaths.
('68 Code, § 11½-7) (Ord. 2-1979-5, passed 2-13-79; Am. Ord. 9-1995-34, passed
9-26-95)
§ 100.08 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Upon the filing of a complaint as herein provided, the administrator
shall cause to be made a prompt investigation of the matter stated in the
complaint.
   (B)   In connection with such investigation, the Administrator may question
and take and record testimony and statements of persons and may examine, record
and copy documents.
   (C)   During or after the investigation, the administrator shall, if it
appears that a discriminatory housing practice act has occurred or is about to
occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including
voluntary discontinuance or rectification of the discriminatory housing
practice and voluntary compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   In the event conciliation is effected, the Administrator shall
disclose nothing said or done in the course of such conciliation in such a way
as to make public identification of the person or persons named in the
complaint without written consent of the persons concerned.
   (E)   Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at
conciliation by the administrator, but within 30 days of the filing of the
complaint with the Administrator, if the efforts of the Administrator to secure
voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful, and if the Administrator has made
a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred,
the Administrator shall recommend to the City Attorney that such violation be
prosecuted in municipal court. If the City Attorney determines to prosecute, he
shall file a formal complaint in municipal court and prosecute same to
conclusion within 30 days after such filing or as soon thereafter as
practicable.
('68 Code, § 11½-8) (Ord. 2-1979-5, passed 2-13-79)
§ 100.09 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as an administrative prerequisite
to a citizen pursuing his rights under any other federal, state or local
statute, case decision or administrative ruling..This chapter is cumulative in
its legal effect and is not in lieu of any and all other legal remedies which a
citizen may pursue.
('68 Code, § 11½-9) (Ord. 2-1979-5, passed 2-13-79)
§ 100.10 COOPERATION WITH SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT.
   The Administrator and the City Attorney are authorized and encouraged to
cooperate with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, pursuant to the
provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1988, being 42 USC 3601 et seq.,
and may render such service to the Secretary as they shall deem appropriate to
further the policies of this chapter and may accept reimbursement from the
Secretary for services rendered to assist him in carrying out the provisions of
the above-cited federal law.
('68 Code, § 11½-10) (Ord. 2-1979-5, passed 2-13-79; Am. Ord. 9-1995-34, passed
9-26-95)
§ 100.11 UNLAWFUL INTIMIDATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether or not acting under color
of law, by force of that of force to willfully injure, intimidate or interfere,
or attempt to injure, intimidate or interfere with:
      (1)   Any person because of his race, color, sex, religion or national
origin and because he is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing,
occupying, or contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental,
financing or occupation of any dwelling, or applying for or participating in
any service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting dwellings; or
      (2)   Any person because he is or has been, or in order to intimidate
such person or any other person or class of persons from:
         (a)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
sex, religion or national origin, in any of the activities, services,
organizations or facilities described in division (1) above; or
         (b)   Affording another person or class of persona opportunity or
protection so to participate; or
      (3)   Any person because he is or has been or in order to discourage such
person or any other person from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to
participate, without discrimination on account of race, color, sex, religion or
national origin, in any of the activities, services, organizations or
facilities described in division (1) above or participating lawfully in speech
or peaceable assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity so to participate.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage
or otherwise penalize any individual, group or business because he or they have
complied with the provisions of this chapter, or enjoyed the benefits of this
chapter, or because he or they have made a charge, testified or assisted in any
manner in any investigation or in any proceeding hereunder, or have made any
report to the administrator.
('68 Code, § 11½-11) (Ord. 2-1979-5, passed 2-13-79)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.12 EDUCATION AND PUBLIC INFORMATION.
   In order to further the objectives of this chapter, the Administrator may
conduct educational and public information programs.
('68 Code, § 11½-12) (Ord. 2-1979-5, passed 2-13-79)
§ 100.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to
exceed $500 per day per violation thereof as provided in §
10.99.
CHAPTER 101: CLEBURNE CONFERENCE CENTER; SENIOR CITIZENS CENTER
Section
General Provisions
   
101.001   Definitions
   
101.002     Purpose
   
101.003     Management and Control
   
101.004     Cleburne Conference Center Department Created
   
101.005     Duties of the Director
   
101.006     Duties of the Cleburne Conference Center Manager and Community
Services Director
   
101.007     Appointment of Employees
   
101.008     Jurisdiction
   
101.009     Conditions for Use; Enforcement
   
101.010     Firearms; Discharge
Cleburne Conference Center; Senior Citizens Center Properties
   
101.030     Buildings and Other Property
   
101.031     Merchandising; Advertising and Signs
   
101.032     Interference with Users or Permittees
Reservation Procedures
   
101.040     Reservations Required
   
101.041     Reservation Procedure
   
101.042     Procedures of Issuance of Reservations
   
101.043     Duties of the Community Services Director, City Manager or his
designee
Fee Payment
   
101.050     Rental Fee Payments
   
101.051     Cancellation of Reservation
Fee Schedule
   
101.055     Cleburne Conference Center Rental Fee Schedule
   
101.056     (Reserved)
   
101.057     (Reserved)
   
101.058     Senior Citizen Center Rental Fee Schedule
   
101.059     Senior Citizen Center Janitorial Service Fee
   
101.060     Classification of Facility Uses Definitions
   
101.061     Damage Deposit Fee
   
101.062     Annual Reservations
   
101.063     Senior Citizen Educational Programs
   
101.064     Senior Citizens Advisory Board Sponsored Activities
 
   
101.999     Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 101.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
   AMPLIFIED SOUND. Any sound projected or transmitted by artificial means,
including but not limited to, amplifiers, loudspeakers or any other similar
devices.
   CITY. The City of Cleburne, Texas.
   CLEBURNE CONFERENCE CENTER MANAGER. That individual charged with the
responsibilities of overseeing the maintenance, care and scheduling of events
of the Cleburne Conference Center.
   CONFERENCE CENTER MANAGEMENT AGREEMENT. Management agreement assigns
administration, reservations, and day-to-day operations of the conference
center to an organization approved by Council. This agreement is administered
by the City Manager or his designee.
   DEPARTMENT. The Conference Center department.
   DIRECTOR. The Community Services Director.
   PARKING AREA. Any designated portion of land surrounding the Cleburne
Conference Center or senior citizens center.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   RESERVATION. An executed contract from the Cleburne Conference Center
manager gaining permission to carry out a given activity on a specific date in
a specific facility.
   SENIOR CITIZENS ADVISORY BOARD SPONSORED ACTIVITY. Any activity, held at the
Senior Citizens Center, sponsored by the Senior Citizens Advisory Board.
   SENIOR CITIZENS CENTER. The structure designated for senior citizen
activities.
   VEHICLE. Any wheeled device of conveyance, propelled by motor or engine. The
term shall include any trailer of any kind, size or description. Exception is
made for any city-owned vehicle.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 04-2000-31, passed 4-25- 00; Am.
Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12; Am. Ord. 03-2018-24, passed 3-27-18)
§ 101.002 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules and regulations for the
Cleburne Conference Center and the senior citizens center facilities of the
City of Cleburne, designed for the use and enjoyment of the citizens of the
city.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12)
§ 101.003 MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL.
   The Cleburne Conference Center and the senior citizens center including all
equipment located therein shall be under the management and control of the City
Manager or his appointed Community Services Director or designee who shall be
responsible to the City Manager in the conduct and affairs of these facilities.
Care and control responsibilities of overseeing the maintenance, care and
scheduling of events of the Senior Citizens Center is under the direction of
the Community Services Director.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12; Am.
Ord. 03-2018-24, passed 3-27-18)
§ 101.004 CLEBURNE CONFERENCE CENTER DEPARTMENT CREATED.
   There shall be a department of city government to be known as the Cleburne
Conference Center Department. This department shall consist of the Cleburne
Conference Center. This department shall be under the immediate supervision of
the Cleburne Conference Center Manager or the City Manager’s designee. This
department shall be a part of the City Manager’s Administration and as such is
under the supervision and control of the City Manager or his designee.
Community Services Director has oversight of the Senior Citizens Center and its
operations.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12; Am.
Ord. 03-2018-24, passed 3-27-18)
§ 101.005 DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR.
   Subject to the approval of the City Manager, the Community Services Director
or the City Manager's designee shall be responsible for determining overall
policies, regulations and programs governing acquisition, improvement,
maintenance and operation of the Cleburne Conference Center and the senior
citizens center. The Director or the City Manager's designee shall be
responsible to the City Manager for administration and implementation of the
policies established by the City Manager and/or City Council in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12; Am.
Ord. 03-2018-24, passed 3-27-18)
§ 101.006 DUTIES OF THE CLEBURNE CONFERENCE CENTER MANAGER AND COMMUNITY
SERVICES DIRECTOR.
    Subject to the approval of the City Manager and Council, the management
agreement will direct, the Cleburne Conference Center Manager to be responsible
for the day-to-day operations of the Cleburne Conference Center. This shall
include the maintenance and care of these facilities as well as the scheduling
of events to be held in each facility. This agreement shall be administered by
the City Manager or his designee. The Community Services Director will be
responsible for the day-to-day operations of the Senior Citizens Center. This
shall include the maintenance and care of this facility as well as the
scheduling of events to be held in the facility.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12; Am.
Ord. 03-2018-24, passed 3-27-18)
§ 101.007 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   The management agreement includes hiring and overseeing the Conference
Center Manager and support staff. The agreement includes administration of
payroll and insurance of facility personnel.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12; Am.
Ord. 03-2018-24, passed 3-27-18)
§ 101.008 JURISDICTION.
   The rules and regulations of this chapter shall be in force in the Cleburne
Conference Center and the senior citizens center unless specifically exempted
by this article.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12)
§ 101.009 CONDITIONS FOR USE; ENFORCEMENT.
   Compliance with the rules and regulations of this chapter is a condition of
the use of the Cleburne Conference Center and the senior citizens center.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12)
§ 101.010 FIREARMS; DISCHARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol, air gun or
firearm of any kind in the facilities or on the grounds of the Cleburne
Conference Center and the senior citizens center.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12)
CLEBURNE CONFERENCE CENTER; SENIOR CITIZENS CENTER PROPERTIES
§ 101.030 BUILDINGS AND OTHER PROPERTY.
   No person shall do, or cause to be done, any of the following, inside or
outside of the Cleburne Conference Center or the senior citizens center,
without first obtaining a permit:
   (A)   Mark, deface, injure, displace, remove or tamper with any piece of
equipment, furniture, fixtures, buildings or other property of said facilities.
   (B)   Construct, alter, modify or erect any partition or structure of any
kind, whether permanently or temporarily, without written consent from the
Community Services Division Director.
(Am. Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12)
§ 101.031 MERCHANDISING, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS.
   No person, within the said facilities or on the grounds of the facilities
shall:
   (A)   Expose or offer for sale or hire any article, thing or service, nor
station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or
display of any article, thing or service unless a permit has been obtained from
the Cleburne Conference Center Manager.
   (B)   Announce, advertise or call the public's attention in any way to any
article, thing or service for sale or hire unless done pursuant to a permit
obtained from the Cleburne Conference Center Manager.
   (C)   Paste, glue, tack or otherwise place any sign, placard, advertisement
or inscription on any facility of this department or cause to be erected any
sign on any property owned by the city surrounding said facilities unless done
pursuant to a permit obtained from the Cleburne Conference Center Manager.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12)
§ 101.032 INTERFERENCE WITH USERS OR PERMITTEES.
   No person shall prevent, disturb or unreasonably interfere with any person
or group occupying any area or room or participating in any lawful activity
permitted within the Cleburne Conference Center and the senior citizens center
or on surrounding public property of these facilities.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12)
RESERVATION PROCEDURES
§ 101.040 RESERVATIONS REQUIRED.
   In addition to any other provision of this chapter that requires the
obtaining of a reservation prior to engaging in a given activity, no person
shall conduct, operate, present, manage or take part in any of the following
activities in the Cleburne Conference Center and the senior citizens center
unless a reservation is obtained prior to the start of such activity:
   (A)   Any organized event using all or a portion of said facilities.
   (B)   Any exhibit, dramatic performance, play, motion picture, radio or
television broadcast, fair, musical event or any similar event.
   (C)   Any public meeting, assembly, ceremony, address, speech, political
meeting or other gathering.
   (D)   Any organized sports activity.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12)
§ 101.041 RESERVATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   An executed reservation contract is required to guarantee a
reservation.
   (B)   Only persons twenty-one (21) years of age or older can reserve the
Cleburne Conference Center or the senior citizens center.
   (C)   The rental period is outlined in the Fee Schedule Section. Extended
hours for cleanup may be arranged in advance with the Cleburne Conference
Center Manager, if the facility is available during the time requested.
   (D)   A person seeking issuance of a reservation to conduct an activity or
event in these facilities shall file an application with the Cleburne
Conference Center Manager. The application shall state:
      (1)   The name, mailing address and telephone number of the person and/or
organization and its officers applying for the permit.
      (2)   If the use or activity is to be conducted for, on behalf of or by
any person other than the applicant, then state their name, mailing address and
telephone number.
      (3)   The exact nature of the use, event or activity for which the
reservation is being sought.
      (4)   The day and hours for which the reservation is desired.
      (5)   The room or recreational area desired to be reserved.
      (6)   An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
      (7)   Any other information that the Cleburne Conference Center Manager
may deem reasonably necessary in order to determine whether to issue a
reservation.
   (E)   Applications for reservations shall be filed with the Conference
Center Manager no more than 365 days before the date of the activity, event or
use.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12)
§ 101.042 PROCEDURES OF ISSUANCE OF RESERVATIONS.
   (A)    A reservation shall be issued unless it is found:
      (1)    That the proposed activity, event or use of these facilities will
unreasonably interfere with other scheduled users of the facility;
      (2)    The proposed activity, event or use of these facilities will
unreasonably interfere with the public health, safety or welfare of other users
and/or the general public;
      (3)    That the conduct of the proposed activity, event or use is
reasonably likely to result in or create a clear and present danger of violence
to persons or property resulting in serious harm to the public;
      (4)    That the facility desired has already been reserved for another
activity, event or use at the same day and hour requested in the reservation
application;
      (5)    That false or misleading information is contained in the
reservation application or required information is omitted;
      (6)    That the event would violate any federal, state or municipal law;
or
      (7)   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
            COMPETING SHOW. An event which has 35% or more of its net square
footage of exhibit space showing/selling product lines or businesses the same
or substantially similar to those in the client’s show. However, a show that is
open to the public shall not be deemed a competing show with a show open only
to the trade.
            PROTECTION CLAUSE. Center agrees that it will not lease any portion
of the facility to any competing show within the protection period.
         (b)   Protection clause. A protection clause may be granted by Center
to recurring consumer or trade shows that have a proven record of success in
the region, and which have produced significant local economic benefit. If
granted, the protection clause will offer protection 45 days on either side of
the show (protection period) from a competing show. The determination whether
or not an event is a competing show is solely within the discretion of the
Center Manager and shall be based upon the target audience, product lines and/
or business listings or prospects from both events. In the event a show’s
audience, product lines or businesses change and is then deemed to be a
competing show, the reservation will be in violation of the agreement and will
result in cancellation of this agreement and forfeiture of all payments made by
the client. No client may reserve the Center 45 days on either side of an event
that is substantially similar.
   (B)   The Cleburne Conference Center Manager may impose reasonable
conditions or restrictions on the granting of a reservation, including but not
limited to any of the following:
      (1)   Restrictions on fires, amplified sound, use of alcoholic beverages,
dancing, sports activities, use of animals, equipment or vehicle use, the
number of persons in attendance, the location of any bandstand or stage or any
other use which may appear likely to create a risk of harm to the use and
enjoyment of the Cleburne Conference Center and the senior citizens center.
      (2)    A requirement that the applicant post a reasonable deposit of
security for the repair of any damage to these facilities or the cost of clean-
up or both.
      (3)   A requirement that the applicant furnish adequate security forces
as determined by Conference Center Manager or Cleburne Police Chief or his
designee during the proposed use or activity. Cleburne Police Department Off-
Duty Security and Traffic Control Policy will apply.
      (4)    A requirement that the reserving party furnish additional sanitary
and/or refuse facilities that might be reasonably necessary, based on the use
or activity for which the reservation is being sought.
   (C)   Reservations shall not be transferrable without the written consent of
the Cleburne Conference Center Manager.
   (D)   Any aggrieved person who is denied a reservation shall have the right
to appeal, in writing, within five days to the City Manager, who shall consider
the request and either sustain or overrule the Cleburne Conference Center
Manager's decision.
   (E)    A reserving party shall be bound by all rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in his
reservation.
   (F)    The person or persons to whom the reservation is issued shall be
liable for any loss, damage or injury to any person or property whatsoever by
reason of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such reservation is
issued.
   (G)   The Community Services Division Director or the Cleburne Conference
Center Manager shall have the authority to revoke a reservation upon finding of
a violation of any rule, ordinance, state, federal or local law or upon the
violation of any condition or restriction under which the reservation was
issued.
   (H)    Reservations shall be made in person by the responsible person.
   (I)   If approved, it will be the applicant's responsibility to pick up the
reservation from the Cleburne Conference Center Manager or it may be mailed
upon request.
   (J)   A separate reservation book shall be kept on the Cleburne Conference
Center and the senior citizens center.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12; Am.
Ord. 05-2014-32, passed 5-13-14; Am. Ord. 09-2019-08, passed 2-12-19)
§ 101.043 DUTIES OF THE COMMUNITY SERVICES DIRECTOR, CITY MANAGER OR HIS
DESIGNEE.
   The Community Services Division Director or the City Manager's designee
shall have the authority to make, from time to time, such reasonable rules and
regulations as are necessary to manage, preserve and govern the Cleburne
Conference Center and the senior citizens center property, buildings and
activities, and to exempt reserving parties of these facilities from certain
requirements of this chapter if he deems it in the best interest of the city.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12; Am.
Ord. 03-2018-24, passed 3-27-18)
FEE PAYMENT
§ 101.050 RENTAL FEE PAYMENTS.
   Rental fees and deposits must be paid at least 14 days prior to the date of
the event to avoid cancellation.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99)
§ 101.051 CANCELLATION OF RESERVATION.
   If cancellations are received by the Cleburne Conference Center Manager at
any time prior to 14 days before the date of the event, a full refund shall be
made. No refunds will be made for cancellations after fourteen (14) days.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12)
FEE SCHEDULE
§ 101.055 CLEBURNE CONFERENCE CENTER RENTAL FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Conference Center Room Rates Table.
Conference Center Room Rates
                                                            City of
                                                            Cleburne  Non-
                                          Rates*   Deposit  Non-      Profit
     Square  Room       Banquet/  Theatre                   Profits   Deposit  Optional
Room Footage Dimensions Classroom Style                     (30%               Cleaning
                        Seating   Seating                   Discount)          Service
                                          1/  Full 1/  Full 1/  Full  1/  Full
                                          2   Day  2   Day  2   Day   2   Day
                                          Day      Day      Day       Day
Conference Center Room Rates
                                                                              City of
                                                                              Cleburne     Non-Profit
                                Banquet/  Theatre Rates*        Deposit       Non-Profits  Deposit     Optional
Room       Square    Room       Classroom Style                               (30%                     Cleaning
           Footage   Dimensions Seating   Seating                             Discount)                Service
                                                  1/     Full   1/     Full   1/    Full   1/   Full
                                                  2 Day  Day    2 Day  Day    2 Day Day    2    Day
                                                                                           Day
Brazos
Exhibit    10,302    102 x 101  700       1,300   $480   $840   $480   $840   $336  $588   $336 $588   $600
Hall
Texas
(Both
Cross
Timbers    4,386     86 x 51    280       487     $330   $660   $330   $660   $228  $456   $228 $456   $500
and Cross
Timbers
Branch)
Cross      3,111     61 x 51    200       300     $180   $360   $180   $360   $126  $252   $126 $252   $300
Timbers
Cross
Timbers    1,275     25 x 51    80        150     $150   $300   $150   $300   $102  $204   $102 $204   $200
Branch
Yellow     900       20 x 45    42        80      $120   $240   $120   $240   $84   $168   $84  $168   $100
Jacket
Camp       532       14 x 38    36        76      $120   $240   $120   $240   $84   $168   $84  $168   $100
Henderson
Chisholm
Trail      416       16 x 26    12        NA      $60    $120   $60    $120   $42   $84    $42  $84    $50
Board
Room**
General
Pat        200       10 x 20    18        30      $42    $78    $42    $78    $30   $54    $30  $54    $50
Cleburne**
Bluebonnet 154       11 x 14                    $42    $42    $42    $80    $29   $29    $29  $29    $50
K-1        (Kitchen)                           $100   $200   $100   $200   $70   $140   $70  $140   $150
K-2        (Kitchen)                           $100   $200   $100   $200   $70   $140   $70  $140   $150
K-3        (Kitchen)                           $75    $150   $75    $150   $53   $70    $53  $70    $100
Santa Fe   2,000                               $600   $1,200 $600   $1,200 $350  $700   $350 $700   $500
Lobby
Community
Performing 8,500               NA        297     $240   $480   $600   $600   $168  $336   $350 $350   $400
Arts
Center***
Entire     17,836              1,049     2,559   $1,320 $2,400 $1,320 $2,400 $924  $1,680 $924 $1,680 $2,000
Facility
Parking                                           $10    $10                  $7    $7 per
Space                                         per    per    $300   $300   per   space  $210 $210   $300
Rental                                            space  space                space
*   Ticket surcharge: $1.00 per ticket sold for performing events.
**   After hours charge: Add $100 to Chisholm Trail Board Room and General Pat Cleburne for reservations past
5:30 p.m. Monday-Friday and weekends.
***   Cleburne Carnegie Players Productions: Rehearsal $35 for 5 hour rental’ performance $75 for 5 hour rental
plus $1 per person per attendance ticket sold; deposit
Room Heights:
Exhibit Hall   19 feet
Meetings Rooms   14 feet
Note: Room dimensions are approximate.
 
   (B)   Other fees.
      (1)   For-profit users.
         (a)   Alcohol.
            1.   Deposit. A $300 alcohol deposit shall be required and will be
refunded contingent upon meeting the $300 minimum bar fee.
            2.   Security fee. Cleburne Police Officers, shall be reserved
through the Conference Center and must be on duty as follows or as determined
by Police Chief or his designee: 1 to 100 guests - two officers; 101 to 300
guests - three officers; 301 to 500 guests - four officers; 501 and over,
number of officers will be determined by Cleburne Police Chief or his designee.
In the event, Cleburne Police Officers are not available for the required
security, the Police Chief or his designee may allow off-duty officers from
other agencies, but proof of general liability (bodily injury/property damage/
indemnification for litigation arising from off-duty employment) must be
provided prior to the event. There is a two-hour minimum per Officer. Officers
will be paid directly by the lessee at the current market rate as referenced in
the Cleburne Police Department Off-Duty and Traffic Control policy. All other
conditions of the policy will apply.
         (b)   Caterers' permit. This is a yearly fee of $25 charged to
caterers utilizing the Cleburne Conference Center. They must have a City of
Cleburne Health Permit in place before receiving the permit. Payment will be
made through Conference Center office.
         (c)   Stages. Stages come in sections of 4 x 8 feet each. These are
charged per piece at a rate of $10 each.
         (d)   TV/DVD players/projector with screen. Will be charged per event
at $25.
         (e)   Hanging interior/exterior items. The CCC staff will install and
remove your items requiring use of an aerial lift (congruent with our current
rules and regulations) at a base fee of $25 per hour, with a one hour minimum.
         (f)   Podium. Will be charged per event at $10 per room.
         (g)   Sound system with microphone. Will be charged per event at $50
per room.
         (h)   TV/projector with screen. Will be charged per event at $25 per
room.
         (i)   Laptop with clicker. Will be charged per event at $25 per room.
         (j)   A/V package. Podium, sound system with microphone, TV/projector
with screen, laptop with clicker will be charged per event at $100 per room.
         (k)   Dance floor(21 x 21). $150 per event.
         (l)   Piano. $50 per event (renter is responsible for tuning).
         (m)   Grand piano. $100 per event (renter is responsible for tuning).
         (n)   Sound and lighting professional (CPAC). Approval by CCC staff
required.
         (o)   Coffee service with 50 cups. $15 per pot.
         (p)   Early (before 8:00 a.m.) or after specified contract ending
time. Minimum $100 per hour, must be paid at conclusion of event.
         (q)   Outdoor event electric surcharge. $50 per day per unit (food
trucks, speciality usage, etc.).
         (r)   Reposition room. $100 per room.
      (2)   Non-profit users (Monday through Thursday only 8:00 a.m. to
midnight) Friday through Sunday same as for profit users.
         (a)   Alcohol.
            1.   Deposit. A $300 alcohol deposit shall be required and will be
refunded contingent upon meeting the $300 minimum bar fee.
            2.   Security fee. Cleburne Police Officers, shall be reserved
through the Conference Center and must be on duty as follows or as determined
by Police Chief or his designee: 1 to 100 guests - two officers; 101 to 300
guests - three officers; 301 to 500 guests - four officers; 501 and over,
number of officers will be determined by Cleburne Police Chief or his designee.
In the event, Cleburne Police Officers are not available for the required
security, the Police Chief or his designee may allow off-duty officers from
other agencies, but proof of general liability (bodily injury/property damage/
indemnification for litigation arising from off-duty employment) must be
provided prior to the event. There is a two-hour minimum per Officer. Officers
will be paid directly by the lessee at the current market rate as referenced in
the Cleburne Police Department Off-Duty and Traffic Control policy. All other
conditions of the policy will apply.
         (b)   Caterers' permit. This is a yearly fee of $25 charged to
caterers utilizing the Cleburne Conference Center. They must have a City of
Cleburne Health Permit in place before receiving the permit. Payment will be
made through Conference Center office.
         (c)   Stages. Stages come in sections of 4 x 8 feet each. These are
charged per piece at a rate of $10 each.
         (d)   TV/DVD players/projector with screen. Will be charged per event
at $25.
         (e)   Hanging interior/exterior items. The CCC staff will install and
remove your items requiring use of an aerial lift (congruent with our current
rules and regulations) at a base fee of $25 per hour.
         (f)   Podium. Will be charged per event at $10.
         (g)   Sound system with microphone. Will be charged per event at $50
per room.
         (h)   TV/projector with screen. Will be charged per event at $25 per
room.
         (i)   Laptop with clicker. Will be charged per event at $25 per room.
         (j)   A/V Package. Podium, sound system with microphone, TV/projector
with screen, laptop with clicker will be charged per event at $100 per room.
         (k)   Dance floor (21 x 21). $150 per event.
         (l)   Piano. $50 per event (renter is responsible for tuning).
         (m)   Grand piano. $100 per event (renter is responsible for tuning).
         (n)   Sound and lighting professional (CPAC). Approval by CCC staff
required.
         (o)   Coffee service with 50 cups. $15 per pot.
         (p)   Early (before 8:00 a.m.) or after specified contract ending
time. Minimum $100 per hour, must be paid at conclusion of event.
         (q)   Outdoor event electric surcharge $50 per day per unit (food
trucks, speciality usage, etc.).
         (r)   Reposition room. $100 per room.
   (C)   Rental fees on the following will be provided by conference center
staff.
      (1)   Projector;
      (2)   Internet access;
      (3)   Fax line;
      (4)   Long distance/conference calling;
      (5)   Linens.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 11-2009-73, passed 11- 24-09; Am.
Ord. 05-2010-25, passed 5-11-10; Am. Ord. 05-2011-24, passed 2-10-11; Am. Ord.
03-2012-12, passed 3-27-12; Am. Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12; Am. Ord. 06-
2012-24, passed 6-12-12; Am. Ord. 07-2013-42, passed 7-23-13; Am. Ord. 03-2018-
24, passed 3-27-18; Am. Ord. 02-2019-08, passed 2-12-19)
§ 101.056 (RESERVED).
§ 101.057 (RESERVED).
§ 101.058 SENIOR CITIZEN CENTER RENTAL FEE SCHEDULE.
   The following is a rental fee schedule for the senior citizen center:
 8:00 am to Noon or Noon to 5:00 p.m. 6:00 p.m. to 12:30 a.m. Full Day Rental
 per session
                      8:00 am to Noon or 6:00 p.m. to 12:30 Full Day Rental
                      Noon to 5:00 p.m.  a.m.
                      per session
I. Meeting/Fund       40.00              55.00              105.00
Raisers:
II. Banquets/Parties: 45.00              65.00              135.00
III. Commercial       n/a                200.00             n/a
Dances:
IV. Commercial Uses:  65.00              85.00              200.00
V. Civic Clubs,
Schools, County, &    25.00              40.00              90.00
Chamber:
VI. Kitchen Use:      20.00              20.00              20.00
 
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99)
§ 101.059 SENIOR CITIZEN CENTER JANITORIAL SERVICE FEE.
   This service is provided upon request from those individuals or
organizations who desire a cleanup service after their use of the facility.
However, not all requests are given this option. Most dances and private
parties are required to provide their own cleanup.
CLASS I: MEETING OR FUND RAISERS
Auditorium: 100.00
Rooms:      20.00
CLASS II: BANQUETS OR PARTIES
Auditorium: 150.00
Rooms:      30.00
CLASS III: COMMERCIAL DANCES
Auditorium: 100.00
CLASS IV: COMMERCIAL USES
Auditorium: 100.00
Rooms:      25.00
CLASS V: CIVIC CLUBS, SCHOOLS, COUNTY & CHAMBER
Auditorium: 100.00
Rooms:      20.00
 
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99)
§ 101.060 CLASSIFICATION OF FACILITY USES DEFINITIONS.
CLASS I: MEETINGS OR FUND RAISERS
   This class applies to any gathering for the purpose of holding a meeting
only, private or professional. It also applies to persons, organizations and
associations considered non-commercial when the event to be held is to raise
money and when receipts are donated to a charity or community-benefit project
for which such function is intended. This can include dances.
CLASS II: BANQUETS OR PARTIES
   This class applies to any gathering for the purpose of holding an activity
or meeting with food being prepared or served. This will include banquets,
class reunions, family reunions, parties, weddings and receptions.
CLASS III: COMMERCIAL DANCES
   This class applies to any gathering for the purpose of engaging in a dance
activity open to the public where an admission fee is charged. This class will
include Quinceaneras (15th birthday celebrations).
CLASS IV: COMMERCIAL USES
   This class applies to any gathering other than dances where an admission fee
is charged.
CLASS V: CIVIC CLUBS, SCHOOLS, COUNTY, & CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
   This class applies to non-profit organizations whose purpose is for
community service. This is for regular meetings of these groups only and these
meetings are subject to be moved to another room at any time to accommodate
another classification being setup or held.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99)
§ 101.061 DAMAGE DEPOSIT FEE.
   For all dances that allow alcoholic beverages, a damage fee of $1,000.00
will be charged. For all other events, the Cleburne Conference Center Manager
has the discretion to charge a minimum of $250.00 and a maximum of $500.00 if
it is determined such activity might cause damage to the facilities.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 04-2012-13, passed 4-10-12)
§ 101.062 ANNUAL RESERVATIONS.
   Reservations made on an annual basis for activities occurring either weekly,
monthly or annually, shall be allowed to be renewed automatically if requested.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99)
§ 101.063 SENIOR CITIZEN EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS.
   Educational programs that are offered to senior citizen groups at the senior
citizen center that do not require an admission fee to attend, nor any charge
for the providing of same, shall be allowed without a rental fee being
assessed.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99)
§ 101.064 SENIOR CITIZENS ADVISORY BOARD SPONSORED ACTIVITIES.
   Activities that are sponsored by the Senior Citizens Advisory Board shall be
allowed without a rental fee or janitorial service fee being assessed.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99, Am.Ord. 04-2000-31, passed 4-25-00)
§ 101.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined not to exceed $500 for each offense. Each day
that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 10-1999-108, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 05-2011-24, passed 5-10-11; Am.
Ord. 03-2012-12, passed 3-27-12; Am. Ord. 06-2012-24, passed 6-12-12)
CHAPTER 102: MUSEUM
Section
General Provisions
   
102.001     Definitions
   
102.002     Purpose
   
102.003     Management and control of museum
   
102.004     Museum Department created
   
102.005     Duties of Museum Curator
   
102.006     Duties of Community Services Division Director
   
102.007     Appointment of employees
   
102.008     Jurisdiction
   
102.009     Conditions for use
Museum Advisory Board
   
102.015     Board created; membership; term and vacancies
   
102.016     Election of officers
   
102.017     Duties of board officers
   
102.018     Conduct of business
   
102.019     Duties of the advisory board
   
102.020     Compensation of members
   
102.021     Conflict of interest
   
102.022     Expenditure of city funds
   
102.023     Visitors to board meetings
   
102.024     Meetings generally
   
102.025     Quorum and rules of parliamentary law
   
102.026     No supervisory powers
   
102.027     Board generated funds
   
102.028     Museum board by-laws; policies and mission statement
Museum Operations and Obligations; Permanent Collection
   
102.035     Acquisition of artifacts
   
102.036     Title to artifacts
   
102.037     Accession and inventory records
   
102.038     Care of collections
   
102.039     Public access to collections
   
102.040     Loans and transfers
   
102.041     Deaccessions
Exhibits and Programs
   
102.045     Exhibited collections
   
102.046     Programs
Facility Use Rules and Regulations
   
102.050     Historic significance
   
102.051     Revenue
   
102.052     Performance theater; historic house and grounds
   
102.053     Museum street train
Photographic Collection
   
102.060     Photographic collection rules and regulations
Fee Schedule
   
102.065     Schedule of fees
Facility Maintenance
   
102.070     Maintenance of buildings, equipment and facilities
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 102.001 TERM DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
   DEPARTMENT. The City of Cleburne W. J. Layland Museum Department.
   DIRECTOR. The Community Services Director.
   MUSEUM ADVISORY BOARD OR "BOARD". That body established pursuant to this
chapter.
   MUSEUM CURATOR. That individual charged with the responsibilities of
overseeing the maintenance and care of all museum facilities and artifacts.
   MUSEUM COLLECTIONS. Those items of historical or educational significance
held by the Museum as permanent acquisitions or as temporary loans.
   STREET TRAIN. A tractor/trailer vehicle used for tours and special events to
transport people.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.002 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules and regulations for the
Museum facilities of the city, designed for the use and enjoyment of the
citizens and visitors of the city.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.003 MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL OF MUSEUM.
   The public museum of the city and all the facilities located therein shall
be under the management and control of the City Manager or his duly appointed
Community Services Division Director who shall be responsible to the City
Manager in the conduct and affairs of the Museum Department.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.004 MUSEUM DEPARTMENT CREATED.
   There shall be a department of city government to be known as the Museum
Department. Said department shall be under the immediate supervision of the
Museum Curator. The Museum Department shall be part of the Community Services
Division and as such, is under the direct supervision and control of the
Community Services Division Director.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.005 DUTIES OF THE MUSEUM CURATOR.
   To facilitate the operation of the public museum, a suitable person shall be
appointed Museum Curator by the Community Services Division Director with the
approval of the City manager. The Curator shall have authority to administer
the museum under the direction and review of the Community Services Division
Director. The Curator shall be held responsible for the care of the museum
collections and historic structures; employment, training and supervising of
museum staff; appropriate and efficient public services and operation of the
museum under the financial conditions set forth in the annual operating budget.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.006 DUTIES OF THE COMMUNITY SERVICES DIVISION DIRECTOR.
   Subject to the approval of the City Manager, the Community Services Division
Director shall be responsible for determining overall policies, regulations and
programs governing acquisition, improvement, maintenance and operation of all
museum facilities, artifacts, equipment and the grounds surrounding all museum
facilities. The Community Services Division Director shall be responsible to
the City Manager for administration and implementation of the policies
established by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.007 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   The Community Services Division Director shall have the power to appoint,
employ and remove such other officers, assistants, employees and personnel as
he may deem necessary for the efficient administration of the affairs of the
Museum Department, and to prescribe and fix their duties, scope of authority
and qualifications in accordance with the annual budget of the Museum
Department as adopted by the City Council and the classification and
compensation plan established by the City Council, all under the approval of
the City Manager.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.008 JURISDICTION.
   The rules and regulations in this chapter shall be enforced in all museum
facilities of the city unless specifically exempted by this chapter.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.009 CONDITIONS FOR USE; ENFORCEMENT.
   Compliance with rules and regulations of this chapter is a condition of the
use of museum facilities of the city.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
MUSEUM ADVISORY BOARD
§ 102.015 BOARD CREATED; MEMBERSHIP, TERM AND VACANCIES.
   (A)    There is hereby created and established a Museum Advisory Board for
the City of Cleburne, Texas.
   (B)   It shall be composed of nine members, five of whom must reside in the
city and four of whom may reside outside the city but must reside in Johnson
County during the term of their appointment by the City Council. The President
of the Cleburne Railroad Museum Group, a local 501(c)(3) non-profit
organization, shall serve as one of the nine members. A member of the Museum
Advisory Board shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council provided,
however, that the term of office shall in no event, without reappointment,
exist for a longer period than two years or until a successor is appointed.
   (C)   The Museum Curator shall serve as an ex-officio member of the board
with no voting privileges.
   (D)   Vacancies on the Board shall be filled in the same manner for the
duration of the term of a position being vacated.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 2-2002-12, passed 2-26- 02; Am.
Ord. 10-2018-80, passed 10-9-18)
§ 102.016 ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
   (A)    The members of the Museum Advisory Board shall meet and organize by
electing a president and treasurer. The Board shall establish such rules and
regulations for the governing of same, as in its judgement may be deemed
necessary and proper.
   (B)    Officers of the Board shall be elected annually at the first meeting
in January or at other appropriate times to fill vacancies. Officers so elected
will take office at the next board meeting following their election.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.017 DUTIES OF BOARD OFFICERS.
   (A)    The president shall preside at all meetings, appoint special
committees as needed and authorize calls for any special meetings.
   (B)    If so desired by the Board, museum staff may serve as secretary
keeping a true and accurate account of all meetings and proceedings. Museum
staff shall have custody of the permanent record of minutes of the Board.
   (C)    The Treasurer shall be familiar with expenditures and balances of the
monies of the Board held by the City in a special revenue fund. The treasurer
shall make a financial report at each meeting of the Board.
   (D)    Nominating committee for new board members shall consist of the
president and Museum Curator and other such Board members as appointed by the
president. In the case where the Board desires to make nominations for vacant
positions on the board, more than one name shall be submitted to the City
Council for consideration. Said nominations shall be forwarded by the Community
Services Division Director to the City Council for their consideration and
review. The City Council is not bound by this list of names when considering
persons for appointment to the Museum Advisory Board.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.018 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.
   The Museum Advisory Board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the City
Council concerning the acquisition, maintenance, operation and use of museum
facilities, equipment and grounds and shall conduct its business at such times
and under such rules and regulations as it may prescribe.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.019 DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
   (A)    It shall be the duty of the Museum Advisory Board to create, and
revise as necessary, a mission statement to guide the Museum in artifact
acquisitions and program planning.
   (B)    It shall confer and work with the Museum Department to make
recommendations to the City Council relating to developmental plans.
   (C)    It shall assist and recommend programs of education for all age
levels, for the effective implementation of such programs and to assist the
City Council in development and adoption of such plans and recommendations in
every way possible.
   (D)    The Museum Advisory Board shall have the advisory input to the
general supervision and control of all matters pertaining to the Museum
Department and shall advise on matters concerning the rules and regulations
pertaining to the operation and use of Museum facilities.
   (E)    It is hereby made the duty and province of the Museum Advisory Board
to make recommendations and suggestions to the City Council for the betterment
and improvement of the museum facilities, acquisitions and activities.
   (F)   Implementation of any and all projects or goals recommended by the
Museum Advisory Board is subject to approval of the City Manager.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.020 COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.
   Members of the Museum Advisory Board shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.021 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   Members of the Museum Advisory Board shall avoid situations where conflict
of interest may occur by refraining from personally collecting objects sought
by the Museum for the permanent collection.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.022 EXPENDITURE OF CITY FUNDS.
   The Museum Advisory Board shall have no authority to make expenditures of
city funds, nor to order any work done on its authority. The Board does have
the authority to expend funds from the Museum Board Funds account in accordance
with city financial policies.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.023 VISITORS TO BOARD MEETINGS.
   The Board shall welcome representatives from local preservation, theatrical,
or educational organizations as well as the general public to the meetings.
Such representatives and public shall have no voting authority.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.024 MEETINGS GENERALLY.
   The Museum Advisory Board shall hold such regular meetings as may be
determined by the Board, and as many other special or called meetings as may be
deemed proper and regular under the rules established by the Board.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.025 QUORUM AND RULES OF PARLIAMENTARY LAW.
   Five members of the Museum Advisory Board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business, and the general rules of parliamentary law shall be
enforced in all proceedings of the Board.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.026 NO SUPERVISORY POWERS.
   The Museum Advisory Board shall have no authority to employ or discharge
employees of the Museum Department. The Board shall not have authority over the
duty assignments of the Museum Department employees.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.027 BOARD GENERATED FUNDS.
   The Museum Advisory Board may elect to sponsor a function or activity for
the purpose of raising funds, gathering donations, or securing contributions
which shall be used for the strict purpose of enhancement of museum facilities,
procurement of equipment or artifacts, renovation of museum facilities or any
other purpose directly related to the museum operation. These funds shall be
deposited in the treasury of the City and kept separate in a fund established
for same.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.028 MUSEUM BOARD BY-LAWS; POLICIES AND MISSION STATEMENT.
   (A)    The Museum Advisory Board shall create a set of by-laws to govern the
Board.
   (B)    The Museum Advisory Board shall create its policies and mission
statement.
   (C)    The Museum by-laws, policies and mission statement may be amended at
any regular meeting of the Board when a quorum is present by a unanimous vote,
providing the amendment is listed in the agenda of the meeting.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
MUSEUM OPERATIONS AND OBLIGATIONS; PERMANENT COLLECTION
   The Museum's permanent collection and exhibit materials represent the
cultural common wealth of the region. As steward of that wealth, the Museum is
compelled to collect, preserve,exhibit, and educate with materials owned or
borrowed for these ends. The collections are the basis for research, exhibits,
and programs that invite public participation. The Museum follows the Code of
Ethics as set forth by the American Association of Museums.
§ 102.035 ACQUISITION OF ARTIFACTS.
   (A)    Artifacts received into the permanent collection, or by loan of
owner, must be relevant and complement the purposes and activities of the
Museum as described in the mission statement.
   (B)    Professional standards for storage and long-term preservation must be
assured for all objects received into the collection.
   (C)    Artifacts shall have permanency in the collections as long as their
physical integrity, authenticity, and usefulness for the purposes of the Museum
can be maintained.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.036 TITLE TO ARTIFACTS.
   (A)    Objects acquired for the collections should be obtained free and
clear, and without restrictions as to use or future disposition.
   (B)    A legal instrument of conveyance, or gift agreement, setting forth an
adequate description of the objects involved, and precise conditions of
transfer will be kept on file at the Museum. Unconditional gifts must be signed
by the donor.
   (C)    Objects on loan from owner shall have a loan agreement executed
setting forth an adequate description of the objects involved, owner
information and terms and conditions of the loan.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.037 ACCESSION AND INVENTORY RECORDS.
   (A)    Accession and inventory records of all objects, and other property
owned or controlled by the Museum, shall be maintained, including: detailed
description, condition report, date acquired, whether gift or loan, and donor
information.
   (B)    When possible, photographs should be made for identification
purposes.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.038 CARE OF COLLECTIONS.
   (A)    The Curator shall be responsible for ensuring acceptable standards in
handling, exhibiting, transporting, and storing of all objects in the permanent
collection. A written collections procedural manual will be prepared and
followed.
   (B)    Environmental protection will be provided to the collection
including, but not limited to, prevention of damage from unfiltered ultraviolet
light, extremes in temperature and humidity, pests, theft, and water.
   (C)    Staff, volunteers, and other personnel having access to the
collection will be trained in proper methods of handling.
   (D)    The unique and special nature of human remains, funerary, and sacred
objects is recognized as the basis of all decisions concerning such collection
objects.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.039 PUBLIC ACCESS TO COLLECTIONS.
   (A)    Requests for retrieval of objects not exhibited for purposes of study
by researchers or visits by the donor family will be honored whenever possible
and when sufficient Museum staff is available.
   (B)    Copies of images from the historic photograph collection may be made
available to the public for a fee.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.040 LOANS OR TRANSFERS.
   (A)    That greater exposure be gained from the permanent collection, loans
or transfers of objects may be approved when sufficient study of the requesting
institution merits acceptance. Such action shall be preceded by: recommendation
of the curator, approval of Museum Board and permission of the City Manager.
   (B)    A record of loans shall be maintained by the curator and renewed
annually.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.041 DEACCESSIONS.
   (A)    The responsibility of creating a permanent collection to support the
mission of the Museum and to direct limited resources toward the artifacts most
likely to survive another century, suggests that objects will be deaccessioned
when their physical integrity diminishes to the point of serving no purpose for
exhibits or research.
   (B)    Such action will be preceded by: recommendation of the curator,
approval of the Museum Board, and permission of the City Manager.
   (C)    No donated object shall be deaccessioned for any reason for two years
after the date of its acquisition. (See U. S. Tax Reform Act of 1984 and 1. R.
S. regulations)
   (D)    Every attempt shall be made to contact the donor family. If the donor
is deceased, the executor of the estate is responsible for negotiations with
the Museum.
   (E)    A complete record of all deaccessions will be maintained by the
curator.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
EXHIBITS AND PROGRAMS
   The Museum shall serve the community by advancing knowledge of the cultural
commonwealth through exhibits, research, scholarship, publications, and
educational programs.
§ 102.045 EXHIBITED COLLECTIONS.
   (A)    Exhibits of historical objects shall be for public appreciation,
education, and enlightenment.
   (B)    Only objects deemed "exhibit quality" and in stable condition shall
be exhibited.
   (C)    The utmost care shall be given to exhibited artifacts when: cleaning,
preparing, transporting, and mounting. Objects shall be secured against
environmental damage and/or theft. Accession numbers shall be preserved on
exhibited objects.
   (D)    Objects shall be rotated and "rested" from exhibit at the discretion
of the curator to secure the longest possible life of the object.
   (E)    Interpretative labels and text for exhibited items will be prepared
in both English and Spanish, whenever possible.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.046 PROGRAMS.
   (A)    Public programs shall support the mission of the Museum. Revenue-
producing activities and those involving external entities likewise shall be
compatible with the Museum's mission and support its public trust
responsibilities.
   (B)    Programs shall be based on scholarship, accuracy, and truth in
presentation.
   (C)    Programs shall be designed for accessibility to the widest possible
audience.
   (D)    Programs shall respect pluralistic values, traditions, and concerns.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
FACILITY USE RULES AND REGULATIONS
   The primary purpose of the Museum complex of historic structures shall be to
provide exhibit and storage space for the city-owned artifact collection. These
spaces shall be reserved for city functions, departmental meetings, educational
programs, receptions, and other events appropriate to the limitations of the
structures. Museum facilities shall be made available for rent by non-profit
organizations when agreement is reached on the necessary limitations of use.
§ 102.050 HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE.
   (A)    The Layland Museum main building was formerly the old Carnegie
Library. As one of only twelve remaining in Texas, it is one of the State's
most important historic structures. In 1978, it was listed on the National
Register of Historic Places. In 1981, it was designated a Recorded Texas
Historic Landmark (RTHL). In 1992, it was listed as a State Archeological
Landmark.
   (B)    The Doty-Fullerton House, 409 N. Buffalo Street, is considered to be
the oldest existing residence in the city, ca. 1868. In 1965, it was designated
a Recorded Texas Historic Landmark (RTHL).
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.051 REVENUE.
   All proceeds from the rental/use of Museum facilities shall be itemized and
forwarded on a regular schedule to the Finance Department according to the City
financial policies.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.052 PERFORMANCE THEATER, HISTORIC HOUSE, AND GROUNDS.
   (A)    Groups desiring to rent the theater or historic house shall make
written application with the Museum curator well before the planned event. Fees
and deposits shall be paid in advance to secure the reservation.
   (B)    Organizations shall appoint a representative, over the age of 21
years, to be responsible for receiving keys to the building and security codes.
Keys and codes shall not be passed among other members of the organization, nor
family members, without permission from the curator.
   (C)    The conduct of all group members, technical crews, visitors or
audience members is the responsibility of the renting organization. Ushers
shall be appointed to provide assistance on stairs during theater events.
Accidents shall be promptly reported to the curator.
   (D)    Food and beverages shall be strictly controlled in the historic
structures.
   (E)    Open flames, cigarettes, matches, chafing dish fuels, and burning
candles shall not be permitted in the structures.
   (F)    Decorations, stage sets, and other ornamental embellishments are
subject to approval by the City Fire Marshal before an event opening.
   (G)    Premises shall be swept and trash generated by the event shall be
removed by the renting party. A walk-through inspection with the curator is
required before the damage deposit is returned.
   (H)    Arrangements may be made to have the structure cleaned at an
additional fee to the renting organization.
   (I)    Artifacts or other equipment within the structure which must be moved
for the event shall be moved by Museum staff
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
§ 102.053 MUSEUM STREET TRAIN.
   (A)    Use policy, license plates, motor vehicle inspection sticker,
insurance, repairs and general maintenance shall be the responsibility of the
Museum Department.
   (B)    Scheduled maintenance shall be conducted by the Fleet Maintenance
Department.
   (C)    The Museum curator shall be responsible for interviewing drivers and
tour guides and securing training for the operation of the street train.
   (D)    No person, other than approved drivers, shall be allowed to operate
the train.
   (E)    The driver shall be responsible for the safe operation of the train
and must obey all traffic laws.
   (F)    The driver shall be responsible to maintain order and see that
passengers conduct themselves in a safe and responsible manner.
   (G)    The driver shall immediately report all accidents or injuries to the
curator.
   (H)    The street train shall not be loaned for out-of-town use without the
written permission of the City Manager.
   (I)    No food or beverages shall be allowed on the train. Use of the street
train shall be by reservation. A schedule of operations shall be maintained by
the Museum staff.
   (J)    Use of the train will be scheduled as drivers are available.
   (K)    Prepaid reservations shall be made at least five working days prior
to date of use.
   (L)    The Museum curator or representative reserves the right to cancel any
reservation for inclement weather or other circumstances preventing the
operation of the street train.
   (M)    Reservations unable to come and not cancelling at least 48 hours in
advance of use will be billed the full reservation amount.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
PHOTOGRAPHIC COLLECTION
§ 102.060 PHOTOGRAPHIC COLLECTION RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)    Copies of historic photographs that are in the Museum's collection
and that are in stable condition may be purchased by individuals according to
the fee schedule in this chapter.
   (B)    All requests for permission to reproduce an image for publication
purposes shall be made in writing and include the intended use, the publisher
and the expected date of publication.
   (C)    All fees or charges for image or photographic reproduction shall be
paid in advance, whether or not the reproduction is used by the requesting
individual.
   (D)    Reproductions may not be superimposed with type matter or in any way
defaced or altered.
   (E)    Application to reproduce a detail from a work will be considered only
upon receipt of a marked photograph showing the exact area to be used. The word
"detail" must appear in the caption with a complete credit line. Under most
circumstances, an application for detailing may be approved only if the work is
shown in its entirety elsewhere in the publication.
   (F)    Permission for book jackets or calendar covers will only be
considered upon receipt of a cover design and written application for such use.
An additional fee is required for cover use.
   (G)    The credit line must appear adjacent to each illustration and must
read: Courtesy, Layland Museum, Cleburne, Texas.
   (H)    Special projects such as notecards, address books, and calendars must
be presented to the Layland Museum for consideration and charges. A sample of
the publication must accompany the request.
   (I)    The Museum shall not supply black and white photographs to companies,
organizations or individuals operating a photography rental and/or sales
service.
   (J)    Applicants shall not duplicate, in any way, a photograph or image
supplied by the Museum.
   (K)    The publisher shall provide the Museum with one complete gratis copy
of the publication in which the image or photograph is reproduced.
   (L)    Any and all responsibility for questions of copyright which may arise
from the preparation of these reproductions or their use in any way will be
assumed by the applicant and the applicant will hold harmless the city, its
officers and its employees.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
FEE SCHEDULE
§ 102.065 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
   (A)    There shall be a fee or charge for the use of museum facilities.
 
Facility/location Size  Capacity    Rental           Deposit
                                    1/2 Day Full Day 1/2 Day Full Day
Museum Theater          150 seats   $50     $100     $50     $100
Museum Boardroom  15x20             $50     $100     $50     $100
208 N. Main             50 seated/  $100    $200     $100    $200
                        75 standing
 
   (B)   Other fees:
      (1)   Educational Programs.
         (a)   Children's   $5
         (b)   Performances   $15
         (c)   Seminars   $20
         (d)   Tours   $12-15
      (2)   Smith history center/kitchen programs.
         (a)   Celebrity Chef   $50
         (b)   Local Chef   $25
   (C)   Other programs/activities may be determined by the Curator on an
individual basis.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 11-2006-90, passed 11-28-06; Am.
Ord. 12-2011-68, passed 12-13-11)
FACILITY MAINTENANCE
§ 102.070 MAINTENANCE OF BUILDINGS, EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.
   (A)    The appropriate city departments shall perform regular maintenance on
all Museum buildings, grounds, facilities, equipment and vehicles. The Museum
Curator, with guidance from the Community Services Division Director, will
exercise professional judgement in supervising procedures that may alter,
deface, or modify historic structures owned or controlled by the city.
   (B)    Museum facilities shall receive annual safety inspections to include
stairs, doors, fire escapes, number of and location of fire extinguishers, and
the security monitoring system.
   (C)    The museum, Doty-Fullerton House and Smith History Center shall be
smoke-free facilities. Appropriate signs indicating these buildings as smoke-
free facilities shall be posted.
(Ord. 10-1999-109, passed 10-12-99)
CHAPTER 103: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS
Section
   
103.001   Definitions
   
103.002    Funeral escort service mandatory
   
103.003    Permit
   
103.004    Permit application
   
103.005    Issuance of funeral escort permit
   
103.006    Revocation of funeral escort permit
   
103.007    Appeal
   
103.008    Transfer of funeral escort permit
   
103.009    Exhibiting funeral escort permit on demand
   
103.010    Equipment on escort vehicles; inspection by the Chief
   
103.011    Insurance and indemnification
   
103.012    Advertising restrictions
   
103.013    Funeral escort permit not to confer civil immunity
   
103.014    Manner of travel of funeral cortege
   
103.015    Funeral cortege right-of-way
§ 103.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF. The Chief of Police for the City of Cleburne, or the Chief's
designee.
   CITY LAW ENFORCEMENT FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE. A passenger vehicle or
motorcycle used by an on-duty law enforcement officer employed by the city and
acting within the scope of the officer's employment and using city equipment to
escort a funeral cortege.
   FUNERAL CORTEGE.  Two or more vehicles accompanying the remains of a
deceased person from a funeral establishment, church, synagogue, or other place
where a funeral service has occurred to a cemetery, crematory, or other place
of final disposition, or a funeral establishment, church, synagogue, or other
place where additional funeral services will be performed.
   OTHER LAW ENFORCEMENT FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE.  A passenger vehicle or
motorcycle used by a certified law enforcement officer employed by an agency
other than the city, in official law enforcement uniform, and using a marked
law enforcement passenger vehicle or motorcycle to escort a funeral cortege.
   PRIVATE FUNERAL ESCORT AGENCY. Any person engaged in the business of
furnishing private funeral escort vehicles for hire that employs one or more
persons as employees, assistants, clerks, or drivers.
   PRIVATE FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE. A passenger vehicle or motorcycle used by
any person other than the driver of a city law enforcement funeral escort
vehicle or other law enforcement funeral escort vehicle, whether the person is
escorting the funeral cortege for hire or not.
(Ord. 12-2000-60, passed 12-12-00)
§ 103.002 FUNERAL ESCORT SERVICE MANDATORY.
   (A)   A funeral director or any other person conducting a funeral must
contract, hire, employ, or provide at least two funeral escorts meeting the
qualifications of this chapter to guide and escort any funeral cortege in the
city. The escorts may be city law enforcement funeral escort vehicles, other
law enforcement funeral escort vehicles, private funeral escort vehicles, or
any combination thereof.
   (B)   The Chief has the sole discretion to determine whether the city will
provide a city law enforcement funeral escort vehicle for any funeral cortege.
The city has no obligation to provide such an escort.
(Ord. 12-2000-60, passed 12-12-00)
§ 103.003 PERMIT.
   (A)   No funeral escort permit is required for the operator of a city law
enforcement funeral escort vehicle.
   (B)   No funeral escort permit is required for the operator of an other law
enforcement funeral escort vehicle, but the Chief must be notified at least 24
hours before the funeral cortege proceeds through the city that the other law
enforcement funeral escort vehicle will be guiding the funeral cortege.
   (C)   Any person operating a private funeral escort vehicle must have a
valid funeral escort permit issued by the city, provided, however, that persons
engaged in such business who are employed by a duly permitted private funeral
escort agency shall not be required to hold individual permits.
(Ord. 12-2000-60, passed 12-12-00)
§ 103.004 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   A representative of a private funeral escort agency, or an individual
operating a private funeral escort vehicle and not employed by a private
funeral escort agency, may apply for a funeral escort permit at the Cleburne
Police Department by completing the standard form provided by the Chief. Such
application must include the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   If the applicant is a business, the trade name under which the
applicant does or proposes to do business, and the name and address of each
partner of a partnership or of each officer and director of a corporation, as
applicable;
      (3)   Proof of current insurance, registration, and inspection for each
private funeral escort vehicle;
      (4)   Proof that each private funeral escort vehicle has proper equipment
as required by this chapter, and is in good condition and working order;
      (5)   A description of each private funeral escort vehicle, including
without limitation, the type, model, and color scheme;
      (6)   A liability and property insurance policy and an indemnification
agreement, as more specifically described in §
103.011;
      (7)   Affidavits from two unrelated citizens attesting to the applicant's
good character; and
      (8)   For drivers of private funeral escort vehicles:
         (a)   The driver's date of birth;
         (b)   Address(es) and place(s) of employment for the previous two
years, with the reason(s) for leaving;
         (c)   A photograph taken within six months prior to the date of the
application;
         (d)   Fingerprints taken by the Cleburne Police Department;
         (e)   A copy of the driving record for the previous two years;
         (f)   If the driver has been convicted of a felony, all information
regarding that conviction;
         (g)   A copy of a current valid driver's license; and
      (9)   Any other information the Chief deems necessary to determine
whether the permit should be issued under the terms of this chapter.
   (B)   All applications for a funeral escort permit under this chapter shall
be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of $100. An application shall
not be considered to have been filed until the applicant has paid the fee in
full and has submitted all required information.
   (C)   It shall be a violation of this chapter if a private funeral escort
agency allows a driver of a private funeral escort vehicle to accompany a
funeral cortege, regardless of whether the agency holds a valid permit, unless
the agency has submitted to the Cleburne Police Department the information
required by subsection (A)(8)(a) through (g), above, for that driver.
(Ord. 12-2000-60, passed 12-12-00)
§ 103.005 ISSUANCE OF FUNERAL ESCORT PERMIT.
   (A)   The Chief shall approve or deny the issuance of a funeral escort
permit within ten calendar days after the applicant files the application. If
the Chief denies the funeral escort permit, the Chief shall give written notice
to the applicant of the denial and the Chief's reason(s) for the denial within
ten calendar days after the applicant files the application.
   (B)   The Chief shall make such investigation as the Chief deems necessary
to determine the fitness of the applicant for a funeral escort permit and if,
in the Chief's opinion, the applicant or agency is unfit to operate a private
funeral escort vehicle, the Chief shall deny the funeral escort permit. In
making this decision, the Chief shall consider whether:
      (1)   The driver of a private funeral escort vehicle:
         (a)   Is at least 18 years of age;
         (b)   Does not have a criminal or driving history that would cause a
reasonable person to believe the driver was not suited to provide funeral
escort services; and
         (c)   Has a valid driver's license for the type of vehicle the driver
will operate;
      (2)   the private funeral escort vehicle:
         (a)   Is covered by valid and sufficient proof of financial
responsibility;
         (b)   Has valid and current inspection and registration stickers; and
         (c)   Has proper equipment as required by this chapter and is in good
condition and working order; and
      (3)   The applicant:
         (a)   Has submitted a liability and property insurance policy and an
indemnification agreement, as required by §
103.011; and
         (b)   Has submitted affidavits from two unrelated citizens attesting
to the applicant's good character.
   (C)   The funeral escort permit shall be valid from the date of issuance
until December 31 of the year the permit was issued, and must be renewed
annually by submitting an updated application and annual permit renewal fee of
$50 to the Chief. No funeral escort permit shall be deemed to grant a vested
property right, but such permit shall remain subject to the terms and
provisions of this chapter and subject to such future regulations as may be
promulgated by the city council by ordinance.
(Ord. 12-2000-60, passed 12-12-00)
§ 103.006 REVOCATION OF FUNERAL ESCORT PERMIT.
   (A)   The Chief may revoke a funeral escort permit if a driver of a private
funeral escort vehicle commits any of the following acts, which shall not be
deemed an exclusive list of grounds for revocation:
      (1)   Conviction of driving while under the influence;
      (2)   Any other criminal conviction that would cause a reasonable person
to believe the applicant was not suited to provide funeral escort services;
      (3)   Excessive violations of traffic laws;
      (4)   Exercising or attempting to exercise police powers not granted by
this chapter;
      (5)   Driving a private funeral escort vehicle not covered by valid and
sufficient proof of financial responsibility;
      (6)   Driving a private funeral escort vehicle that does not have valid
and current inspection or registration stickers;
      (7)   Driving a private funeral escort vehicle that is not in good
condition and working order;
      (8)   Failing to provide a liability and property insurance policy or an
indemnification agreement as required by §
103.011; or
      (9)   Providing any information in the application for a permit that is
false.
   (B)   The Chief shall give written notice of the revocation to the permit
holder. Unless the permit holder appeals, the revocation is effective
immediately on receipt.
   (C)   When the Chief revokes a funeral escort permit, the person shall not
be issued a new funeral escort permit for one year from the date the revocation
became effective. However, if, subsequent to revocation, the Chief finds that
the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the Chief may grant
a new funeral escort permit after at least 90 days have elapsed since the date
the revocation became effective.
(Ord. 12-2000-60, passed 12-12-00)
§ 103.007 APPEAL.
   (A)   If the Chief denies the issuance of a funeral escort permit or revokes
a funeral escort permit as provided in this Chapter, the applicant/permit
holder may appeal the Chief's decision to the City Manager. Any revocation of a
permit is stayed pending the outcome of the City Manager's decision.
   (B)   The applicant/permit holder must file the notice of appeal within ten
days after the receipt of the Chief's written decision. The City Manager shall
grant a hearing within 30 days after receiving the notice of appeal, at which
time the applicant/permit holder and the Chief may present evidence or
information regarding whether the funeral escort permit should be granted or
reinstated. The decision of the City Manager shall be final.
(Ord. 12-2000-60, passed 12-12-00)
§ 103.008 TRANSFER OF FUNERAL ESCORT PERMIT.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person transfers a funeral escort
permit to another person.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person counterfeits, forges,
changes, defaces, or alters a funeral escort permit.
(Ord. 12-2000-60, passed 12-12-00)
§ 103.009 EXHIBITING FUNERAL ESCORT PERMIT ON DEMAND.
   It shall be an offense under this chapter to fail to exhibit a funeral
escort permit to any police officer, upon demand, while escorting a funeral
cortege.
(Ord. 12-2000-60, passed 12-12-00)
§ 103.010 EQUIPMENT ON ESCORT VEHICLES; INSPECTION BY THE CHIEF.
   (A)   All private funeral escort vehicles, while actively operating as an
escort for a funeral cortege, shall be equipped with at least:
      (1)   One white or clear lighted lamp that displays a light under normal
atmospheric conditions for a distance of 500 feet from the front of the
vehicle; and
      (2)   One purple, red, blue, or amber lighted lamp that displays a light
under normal atmospheric conditions for a distance of 500 feet from the front
of the vehicle.
   (B)   The Chief or his designee shall inspect all private funeral escort
vehicles yearly at a time and place that the Chief designates.
(Ord. 12-2000-60, passed 12-12-00)
§ 103.011 INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   Before receiving a funeral escort permit, an operator of a private funeral
escort vehicle must provide:
   (A)   Proof of a current, valid, noncancellable liability and property
insurance policy insuring against any damage or loss resulting from the
operation of any private funeral escort vehicle in a funeral cortege. Such
insurance shall:
      (1)   Have policy limits of at least $500,000 for injuries resulting from
any one accident, and at least $100,000 for damage to property resulting from
any one accident;
      (2)   Be for the protection of property, passengers riding in a funeral
cortege, the general public, and the city, its servants, agents, and employees;
      (3)   Be valid for the entire duration of the permit and contain a
provision for continuing liability thereon up to the full amount,
notwithstanding any recovery; and
      (4)   Name the city as an additional insured.
   (B)   An indemnification agreement on a form provided by the city that
indemnifies, holds harmless, and defends the city against any losses or claims
arising out of the operation of a private funeral escort vehicle.
(Ord. 12-2000-60, passed 12-12-00)
§ 103.012 ADVERTISING RESTRICTIONS.
   No person, in conjunction with advertising the business of furnishing
private funeral escort vehicles, may distribute, present, or give away any
cards, handbills, or printed matter of any kind that include the words
"police," "official," or "officer." No such advertisement shall state, imply,
or represent that the police department, the city, or any other law or
regulation requires a funeral escort vehicle to lead a funeral cortege.
(Ord. 12-2000-60, passed 12-12-00)
§ 103.013 FUNERAL ESCORT PERMIT NOT TO CONFER CIVIL IMMUNITY.
   (A)   No person who operates a private funeral escort vehicle shall, by
virtue of any funeral escort permit issued pursuant to this chapter or any
other law or ordinance, be deemed to be an officer, agent, employee, or
representative of the city. Nor shall any funeral escort permit be construed to
confer upon the holder of the funeral escort permit any privilege or immunity
not expressly granted by this chapter.
   (B)   Nothing in subsection (A) shall be deemed to waive any immunities of a
law enforcement official engaged in official duties by operating a law
enforcement funeral escort vehicle.
(Ord. 12-2000-60, passed 12-12-00)
§ 103.014 MANNER OF TRAVEL OF FUNERAL CORTEGE.
   Funeral corteges shall travel at a safe and prudent speed. All vehicles
comprising the funeral cortege shall follow the preceding vehicle in the
funeral cortege as closely as is practical and safe. Every operator of a
vehicle in a funeral cortege must turn on the vehicle's high beam (bright) head
and tail lamps and the vehicle's hazard lamps (flashers).
(Ord. 12-2000-60, passed 12-12-00)
§ 103.015 FUNERAL CORTEGE RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Unless otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer, the operator
of a funeral escort vehicle may escort all properly identified vehicles in a
funeral cortege through stop signs or signalized intersections without
stopping, but the drivers of such motor vehicles shall exercise due regard for
the safety of all approaching vehicles. The operator of a funeral escort
vehicle shall not stop traffic approaching from the opposite direction or
direct such traffic off the roadway, except at intersections or at other
locations necessary to assist the funeral cortege in making left turns.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to disobey or
disregard the direction of an operator of a funeral escort vehicle when
escorting a funeral cortege, or for any person to fail to yield right-of-way to
any vehicle properly identified as a part of a funeral cortege.
(Ord. 12-2000-60, passed 12-12-00)
CHAPTER 104: ALARMS
Section
   
104.001    Definitions
   
104.002    Alarm permit registration required; transferability; false
statements
   
104.003    Alarm systems in apartment complexes
   
104.004    Permit duration and renewal
   
104.005    Proper alarm systems operation and maintenance
   
104.006    Duties of alarm business
   
104.007    Alarm system operating instructions
   
104.008    Alarm dispatch request records
   
104.009    System performance review
   
104.010    Fines/fees
   
104.011    Revocation of alarm permit
   
104.012    Appeal from denial or revocation of a permit
   
104.013    Reinstatement of permit
   
104.014   Offenses
   
104.015   Government immunity
 
   
104.999   Penalty
§ 104.001 DEFINITIONS.
   ALARM ADMINISTRATOR. A person or persons designated by the Chief of Police
to administer, control and review alarm applications, alarm permits and alarm
dispatch requests.
   ALARM BUSINESS.  Any person who sells, leases, maintains, services, repairs,
alters, replaces, moves, installs or monitors an alarm system in an alarm site.
   ALARM DISPATCH REQUEST. A notification to the police by the alarm business
that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular
alarm site.
   ALARM PERMIT or PERMIT. A certificate, license, permit, registration or
other form of permission from the ALARM ADMINISTRATOR that authorizes a person
to operate an ALARM SYSTEM at an ALARM SITE.
   ALARM SITE. A single premises or location served by an alarm system or
systems. Each tenancy, if served by a separate alarm system in a multi-tenant
building or complex, shall be considered a separate alarm site.
   ALARM SYSTEM. A device or system that transmits or relays a signal to summon
emergency services. Alarm system does not include:
      (1)   An alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is permanently
located at a site; or
      (2)   An unmonitored alarm system that does not cause an alarm dispatch
request requiring Police Department or Fire Department response.
   ALARM USER. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity which
uses an alarm system at its alarm site.
   CHIEF. The Chief of Police of the city or an authorized representative.
   CONVERSION. The transaction or process by which one alarm business begins
monitoring of an alarm system previously monitored by another alarm business.
   DURESS ALARM. A silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a
device intended to signal a crisis situation, including but not limited to a
robbery in progress, requiring police response.
   FALSE ALARM DISPATCH. An alarm dispatch request to the police department,
when the responding officer finds no evidence of a criminal offense or
attempted criminal offense after having responded within 30 minutes of the
alarm notification and determining from an inspection of the interior or
exterior of the premises that the alarm was false. An alarm dispatch request
that is canceled by the alarm business or the alarm user prior to the time the
responding officer reaches the alarm site shall not be considered a false alarm
dispatch. An alarm that is found to be caused by the weather, earthquake or
other event that cannot be foreseen or prevented shall not be considered a
FALSE ALARM DISPATCH.
   MONITORING. The process by which an alarm business receives signals from
alarm systems and relays an alarm dispatch request to the city for the purpose
of summoning police response to the alarm site.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization
or similar entity.
   VERIFY. An attempt by the alarm business, or its representative, to contact
the alarm site by telephonic or other electronic means, whether or not actual
contact with a person is made, before requesting a police dispatch, in an
attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request.
   VIDEO VERIFICATION ALARM. A monitored alarm system in which a trained
central station operator uses live video to confirm an intrusion before calling
police.
(Ord. 6-2001-40, passed 6-12-01; Am. Ord. 09-2019-56, passed 9-24-19; Am. Ord.
07-2021-38, passed 7-27-21)
§ 104.002 ALARM PERMIT REGISTRATION REQUIRED; TRANSFERABILITY; FALSE
STATEMENTS.
   (A)   No alarm user shall operate or cause to be operated an alarm system at
its alarm site without a valid alarm permit issued by the alarm administrator.
A separate permit is required for each alarm site.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a completed application form and the permit fee, the
alarm administrator shall issue an alarm permit to an applicant unless the
applicant has:
      (1)   Failed to pay a fine or fee assessed under §
104.010.
      (2)   Had an alarm permit for the alarm site revoked, and the violation
causing the revocation has not been corrected.
   (C)   Each permit application must include the following information:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone numbers of the alarm user, who
will be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm
system and payment of fees assessed under this chapter;
      (2)   The classification of the alarm site as either residential,
apartment, or commercial/industrial;
      (3)   The name, address and phone number of the alarm business monitoring
the alarm system.
      (4)   Indicating if it is a video verification system.
   (D)   Any false statement of a material matter made by an applicant for the
purpose of obtaining an alarm permit shall be sufficient cause for refusal to
issue a permit.
   (E)   An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person. An alarm user
shall inform the alarm administrator of any change that alters any information
listed on the permit application within five business days after the change.
   (F)   Information contained in permit applications shall be held in
confidence by all employees or representatives of the city with access to
information.
(Ord. 6-2001-40, passed 6-12-01; Am. Ord. 09-2019-56, passed 9-24-19; Am. Ord.
07-2021-38, passed 7-27-21)
§ 104.003 ALARM SYSTEMS IN APARTMENT COMPLEXES.
   (A)   If an alarm system installed by an individual tenant in an apartment
complex unit is monitored, the tenant must provide the name of a representative
of the apartment owner or property manager who can grant access to the
apartment.
   (B)   A tenant of an apartment complex shall also obtain an alarm permit
from the alarm administrator before operating or causing the operation of an
alarm system in the tenant's residential unit.
   (C)   For purposes of assessing fines or fees and enforcing this chapter
against an individual residential unit alarm site, the tenant is responsible
for payment of fines or fees for false alarm dispatches emitted from the alarm
system in the tenant's residential unit.
   (D)   The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall obtain a
separate alarm permit for any alarm system operated in a nonresidential area of
the apartment complex, including, but not limited to, common tenant areas and
offices, storage and equipment areas.
   (E)   Permit fees: (see fine and fee table in §
104.010).
(Ord. 6-2001-40, passed 6-12-01; Am. Ord. 09-2019-56, passed 9-24-19; Am. Ord.
07-2021-38, passed 7-27-21)
§ 104.004 PERMIT DURATION AND RENEWAL.
   A permit shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance, and must be
renewed annually by submitting an updated application and a permit renewal fee
to the alarm administrator. The alarm administrator shall notify each alarm
user of the need to renew 30 days prior to the expiration of their permit. It
is the responsibility of the alarm user to submit an application prior to the
permit expiration date. Failure to renew will be classified as use of a non-
permitted alarm system and shall be a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 6-2001-40, passed 6-12-01; Am. Ord. 09-2019-56, passed 9-24-19)
§ 104.005 PROPER ALARM SYSTEMS OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   An alarm user shall:
      (1)   Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will
minimize or eliminate false alarm dispatches;
      (2)   Make every reasonable effort to respond or cause a representative
to respond to the Alarm systems location within one hour when notified by the
city to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the
premises, or to provide security for the premises; and
      (3)   Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an
occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
   (B)   An alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be
adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site will
sound for no longer than 15 minutes after being activated.
(Ord. 6-2001-40, passed 6-12-01)
§ 104.006 DUTIES OF ALARM BUSINESS.
   (A)   Upon the installation or activation of an alarm system, the alarm
business shall distribute to the alarm user information summarizing:
      (1)   The applicable law relating to false alarms, including the
potential for penalties and revocation or suspension of an alarm registration;
      (2)   How to prevent false alarms;
      (3)   How to operate the alarm system; and
      (4)   Ensure that all alarm users of alarm systems equipped with duress,
holdup or panic alarms are given adequate training as to the proper use of the
system.
   (B)   The alarm business shall notify the alarm administrator of an
installation or activation of an alarm system no later than thirtieth day after
the date of the installation or activation. The alarm installation company
shall provide to the alarm administrator:
      (1)   The alarm business name;
      (2)   The alarm business license number;
      (3)   The name of the alarm user at the alarm site;
      (4)   The alarm site address; and
      (5)   The date of the installation or activation.
   (C)   The alarm business shall maintain a license through the State
Department of Public Safety Private Security Bureau.
   (D)   An alarm business performing monitoring services shall:
      (1)   Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by the
alarm administrator;
      (2)   Attempt to verify every alarm signal, except a duress alarm
activation, before requesting a police response to an alarm signal;
      (3)   Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the city in a manner and
form determined by the alarm administrator;
      (4)   Communicate verified cancellations of alarm dispatch requests to
the city in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator.
      (5)   Ensure that all alarm users of alarm systems equipped with a duress
alarm are given adequate training as to the proper use of the duress alarm.
   (E)   The alarm administrator shall:
      (1)   Designate a manner, form and telephone numbers for the
communication of alarm dispatch requests;
      (2)   Develop a procedure to accept verified cancellation of alarm
dispatch requests.
(Ord. 6-2001-40, passed 6-12-01; Ord. 07-2021-38, passed 7-27-21)
§ 104.007 ALARM SYSTEM OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS.
   An alarm user shall maintain at each alarm site a set of written operating
instructions for each alarm system.
(Ord. 6-2001-40, passed 6-12-01)
§ 104.008 ALARM DISPATCH REQUEST RECORDS.
   (A)   The police department telecommunicator and officer responding to an
alarm dispatch request shall record such information as necessary to permit the
alarm administrator to maintain records, including, but not limited to, the
following information:
      (1)   Identification of the alarm site;
      (2)   Date and time of the alarm dispatch request;
      (3)   Arrival time of the responding police officer at the alarm site;
      (4)   Weather conditions if applicable;
      (5)   Area and/or sub-area of premise involved;
      (6)   Name of alarm user's representative on premises, if any;
      (7)   Identification of the responsible alarm business, and/or;
      (8)   If applicable, inability to locate the address and effort made to
locate the correct address by the responsible alarm business.
   (B)   The responding police officer shall indicate on the dispatch record
whether the dispatch was caused by a criminal offense, an attempted criminal
offense, or was a false alarm dispatch.
   (C)   In the case of an assumed false alarm dispatch, the alarm
administrator shall cause there to be issued notice, through regular mail or
electronic mail, that the police department has responded to a false alarm
dispatch. The notice shall include the following information:
      (1)   The date and time of police response to the false alarm dispatch;
      (2)   A statement urging the alarm user to ensure that the alarm system
is properly operated, inspected, and serviced in order to avoid fines.
   (D)   Alarm businesses that perform monitoring of alarm systems must
maintain records relating to the dispatch for a period of at least one year
following an alarm dispatch request to an alarm site. Records must include the
name, address and phone number of the alarm user, the alarm system zone(s) or
point(s) activated, the time of request for police dispatch and evidence that
an attempt to verify was made to the alarm site prior to the request for police
dispatch. The alarm administrator may request copies of such records for
individually named alarm users.
(Ord. 6-2001-40, passed 6-12-01; Am. Ord. 09-2019-56, passed 9-24-19)
§ 104.009 SYSTEM PERFORMANCE REVIEW.
   If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or
maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation and suppresses false
alarms, the alarm administrator may require a conference with an alarm user and
the alarm business responsible for the repair of the alarm system to review the
circumstances of each false alarm.
(Ord. 6-2001-40, passed 6-12-01)
§ 104.010 FINES/FEES.
   (A)   (1)   Permit fees.
 
Residential Alarm System Permit Fee         $15.00
Residential Alarm System Annual Renewal Fee $15.00
Late Fee after 30 days                      $20.00
Commercial Alarm System Permit Fee          $50.00
Commercial Alarm System Annual Renewal Fee  $50.00
Late Fee after 30 days                      $20.00
 
      (2)   One half of the permit fee is waived for a video verification alarm
system.
      (3)   No refund of a permit or permit renewal fee will be made.
      (4)   The initial annual permit fee must be submitted to the alarm
administrator within 30 days after the alarm installation.
   (B)   An alarm user shall be subject to citation and/or fines, depending on
the number of false alarm dispatches emitted from an alarm system within a 12
month period based upon the following schedule:
 
1st - 3rd alarm      No charge
4th - 5th alarm      $30.00
6th - 7th alarm      $75.00
8th and beyond alarm $100.00
 
   (C)   Other fines.
      (1)   Any false alarm occurring without a valid alarm permit will be $50
for first offense in a 12-month period, $140 for each additional offense if
within a 12-month period from previous offense.
      (2)   Late fee for payment after 30 days $20.
      (3)   Appeal Hearing Fee *$25 plus assessed fine.
*(Fee and fine shall be refunded in its entirety if appeal is upheld)
      (4)   Reinstatement of response fee $50.
(Ord. 6-2001-40, passed 6-12-01; Am. Ord. 09-2019-56, passed 9-24-19; Am. Ord.
07-2021-38, passed 7-27-21)
§ 104.011 REVOCATION OF ALARM PERMIT.
   (A)   The alarm administrator may revoke an alarm permit if it is determined
that:
      (1)   There is a false statement of a material matter in the application
for a permit; or
      (2)   The permit holder has failed to make timely payment of a fine or
fees assessed under §
104.010.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if he operates an alarm system during the
period in which the alarm permit is revoked.
   (C)   The Chief may not refuse police response to an alarm dispatch request
at an alarm site because of excess false alarms if the fines or fees imposed in
§ 104.010 are paid in full.
   (D)   The Chief may suspend response after the tenth false alarm at an alarm
site within a 12-month period by providing written notice to the alarm user.
(Ord. 6-2001-40, passed 6-12-01; Am. Ord. 09-2019-56, passed 9-24-19; Am. Ord.
07-2021-38, passed 7-27-21)
§ 104.012 APPEAL FROM DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF A PERMIT.
   (A)   If the alarm administrator denies the issuance or renewal of a permit
or revokes a permit, the alarm administrator shall send written notice of the
action and a statement of the right to an appeal, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to both the applicant or alarm user and the alarm business.
   (B)   The applicant or alarm user may appeal the decision of the alarm
administrator to the Chief by filing a written request for a review setting
forth the reasons for the appeal within 20 days after receipt of the notice
from the alarm administrator. An alarm business may submit the request for
review on behalf of an Alarm user. Filing of a request for appeal shall stay
the revocation of a permit until the Chief has completed his/her review. If a
request for appeal is not made within the 20 day period, the action of the
alarm administrator is final. If a timely request for an appeal is made, the
Chief's decision shall be final.
(Ord. 6-2001-40, passed 6-12-01; Am. Ord. 07-2021-38, passed 7-27-21)
§ 104.013 REINSTATEMENT OF PERMIT.
   A person whose alarm permit has been revoked may be issued a new permit if
the person:
   (A)   Submits an updated application and pays a permit fee as required by §
104.002;
   (B)   Pays or otherwise resolves, all citations and fines; and
   (C)   Submits a certification from an alarm business that complies with the
requirements of this chapter, stating that the alarm system has been inspected
and repaired (if necessary) by the alarm business.
(Ord. 6-2001-40, passed 6-12-01)
§ 104.014 OFFENSES.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he fails to apply for a permit within
30 days after installation of an alarm system and/or if he or she thereafter
operates or causes to be operated an alarm system without a valid permit issued
pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if he or she operates an alarm system
during the period in which the alarm permit is revoked.
   (C)   A person commits an offense if he or she engages in the business of
relaying alarm notifications within the city limits of Cleburne without fully
complying with this chapter.
(Ord. 09-2019-56, passed 9-24-19)
§ 104.015 GOVERNMENT IMMUNITY.
   An alarm permit is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or
obligation, either expressed or implied, for a city emergency response. Any and
all liability and consequential damage resulting from the city's failure or
inability to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental
immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm permit, the
alarm user acknowledges that a city emergency response may be influenced by
factors such as: the availability of city emergency service units, priority of
calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing
levels and prior response history.
(Ord. 09-2019-56, passed 9-24-19)
§ 104.999 PENALTY.
   Whoever shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be liable to a penalty as set forth in §
10.99 of the City of Cleburne Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 09-2019-56, passed 9-24-19)
CHAPTER 105: MARKET SQUARE
Section
   
105.01   Established
   
105.02   Definitions
   
105.03   Authority of code official
   
105.04   Permit required
   
105.05   Application procedure
   
105.06   Denial or revocation
   
105.07   Permitted vendors
   
105.08   Permits and fees
   
105.09   Vendor requirements
   
105.10   Specific requirements for agricultural vendors
   
105.11   Specific requirements for special events
   
105.12   Enforcement
   
105.13   Right to refuse stall rental; ejection of person renting stalls;
operation through agent after rejection
 
   
105.99   Penalty
§ 105.01 ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   By authority of RS03-2013-31, passed by the City Council on March 26,
2013, the City of Cleburne entered into an agreement with Johnson County to
manage the daily operations of the Market Square located at 302 South Main
Street owned by Johnson County. The purpose of this chapter is to establish
guidelines and regulations for those operations.
   (B)   Market Square shall be under the management and control of the City
Manager or his or her designee, who has the authority to make daily operational
decisions not otherwise stated in this chapter.
(Ord. 06-2013-40, passed 7-9-13; Am. Ord. 10-2014-84, passed 10-14- 14)
§ 105.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL VENDOR.  Any person who distributes, offers for sale, or sells
one or more of the following products: fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers,
herbs, hay, firewood, homemade soaps, herbal oils, value added products
intended for consumption, and fresh eggs meeting the Texas Department of State
Health Services requirements. Value added products intended for human
consumption include jams, jellies, honey, baked goods that do not require
refrigeration such as cakes cookies, breads, pastries, candy, coated and
uncoated nuts, unroasted nut butters, fruit butters, fruit pies, dehydrated
fruits and vegetables, and dried beans.
   APPLICANT. A person who has filed a formal written application with the city
for the purpose of obtaining a special event permit.
   ARTIST/CRAFTSPERSON VENDOR. A person who distributes, offers for sale, or
sells personally handcrafted, hand created, or handmade goods.
   CITY. The City of Cleburne, Texas.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The person or department to whom the City Manager may, from
time to time, delegate the enforcement responsibility under this chapter.
   FOOD VENDOR. Any person who distributes, offers for sale, or sells food
which is prepackaged or prepared on-site.
   LEASE SPACE. The individual areas within the Market Square designated by the
city as places to be used by vendors.
   PERMIT HOLDER. The person to whom a special event permit is granted pursuant
to this chapter.
   PROMOTER. Any individual, assumed-named entity, partnership, association,
corporation, firm or organization that promotes, organizes, manages, finances
or holds a special event.
   SPECIAL EVENT. A temporary event or gathering held at Market Square for a
common purpose under the direction or control of a promoter or permit holder.
The term includes, but is not limited to, any activity involving entertainment
and/or amplified sound, food, beverage, merchandise sales or any activity
promoted as a festival, trade show open to the public, craft show, public
dance, fund raiser, concert, or performance.
   SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT. A permit issued by the city to a promoter to conduct a
special event.
   STREET. Any public or private street, alley, avenue, lane, boulevard, drive,
public place or highway commonly used for the purpose of travel within the
city.
   UNCOVERED AREAS. Those lease spaces which are not covered by the provided
metal awning.
   VENDOR. Any person who sells, distributes, or offers for sale products
permitted by this chapter.
   WARE VENDOR. A person who distributes, offers for resale, or sells wares
other than; agricultural products sold by an agricultural vendor, food products
sold by a food vendor, or handcrafted or handmade goods sold by an artist/
craftsperson.
(Ord. 06-2013-40, passed 7-9-13; Am. Ord. 10-2014-84, passed 10-14- 14)
§ 105.03 AUTHORITY OF CODE OFFICIAL.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by
the code official.
   (B)   The code official has authority to issue a special event permit when
requirements of this chapter have been met.
   (C)   The code official shall ensure that all other applicable licenses and
permits under local, state or federal law are requested, submitted and approved
before the permit is granted.
(Ord. 06-2013-40, passed 7-9-13; Am. Ord. 10-2014-84, passed 10-14- 14)
§ 105.04 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to promote or conduct a special event at
Market Square without first having obtained a special event permit from the
code official by filing a written application.
(Ord. 06-2013-40, passed 7-9-13; Am. Ord. 10-2014-84, passed 10-14- 14)
§ 105.05 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   An application for a special event must be filed not less than 45 days
before the event is to begin. The code official may waive the 45-day filing
requirement if it is determined that the application can be processed in less
than 45 days, taking into consideration the number and types of permits
required to be issued in order to hold the special event.
   (B)   If the Fire Chief or Police Chief determines that a proposed special
event may have an adverse impact on public safety through diminished access to
buildings, structures, fire hydrants and fire apparatus, access roads or where
the event will adversely affect public safety services of any kind, the Fire
Chief or Police Chief shall have the authority to order the development of, or
prescribe a public safety plan for the provision of an appropriate level of
public safety.
   (C)   Once the application is reviewed, the code official shall issue the
special event permit or issue the permit with conditions unless denied in
accordance with §
105.06.
(Ord. 06-2013-40, passed 7-9-13; Am. Ord. 10-2014-84, passed 10-14- 14)
§ 105.06 DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   The code official may deny or revoke an application for a special
event permit if:
      (1)   A special event permit has been previously granted for, and will
conflict with, another special event at the same time, site or location;
      (2)   The special event would severely hinder the delivery of normal or
emergency services;
      (3)   The time, place or manner of the proposed special event will
disrupt the orderly flow of traffic and no reasonable means of rerouting
traffic or otherwise meeting traffic needs is available;
      (4)   The applicant fails to comply with, or the proposed special event
will violate this chapter or any other city ordinance, or if the applicant has
been cited for violating this chapter during a previous special event or the
applicant has failed to comply with the terms of a previous special event
permit;
      (5)   The applicant fails to provide proof that the applicant possesses
or is able to obtain a license or permit required by city ordinance or other
applicable law for the conduct of all activities included as part of the
special event; or
      (6)   The applicant makes or permits the making of a false or misleading
statement or omission of material fact on an application for a special event
permit.
   (B)   The code official shall grant, grant the permit with conditions, or
deny the permit within ten days after receipt of a completed application.
   (C)   If the code official grants the permit with conditions, denies, or
revokes a permit, the code official shall immediately contact the permit holder
stating the action and the reasons supporting such action. A written notice
shall be hand-delivered or mailed by certified mail to the permit holder's
address as shown on the application.
   (D)   Any person aggrieved by the action of the code official shall have the
right to appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City
Secretary within five business days after the notice of decision is delivered
under division (C).
   (E)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the City Secretary shall set a
time and place for a hearing on the appeal and provide notice of the hearing to
the aggrieved person. The hearing shall be not later than 14 days from the date
of receipt of the notice of appeal.
   (F)   The decision of the City Council on the appeal is final. No other
administrative procedures are provided by the city.
(Ord. 06-2013-40, passed 7-9-13; Am. Ord. 10-2014-84, passed 10-14- 14)
§ 105.07 PERMITTED VENDORS.
   The following types of vendors are permitted to operate in Market Square:
   (A)   Agricultural and artist/craftsperson vendors are allowed to operate
Sunday through Saturday from 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Vendors may arrive at 5:00
a.m. to set up and stay until 9:00 p.m. to break down and vacate Market Square.
Agricultural vendors may be required to close down and vacate Market Square
earlier, if requested by the city, for a reserved special event in conjunction
with an approved special event permit. As much advance notice will be given to
these vendors of any scheduled special event.
   (B)   Food and ware vendors are allowed only during a special event in
conjunction with an approved special event permit.
(Ord. 06-2013-40, passed 7-9-13; Am. Ord. 10-2014-84, passed 10-14- 14)
§ 105.08 PERMITS AND FEES.
   Vendors must obtain all other appropriate licenses and permits when
necessary; and may without notice be required to show such to any city
representative.
   (A)   All vendors are required to reserve a lease space from the city at
least seven days prior to setting up their booth. Reservations may be made at
the approved permit office Monday through Friday, from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
or on-line at the city website. All vendors will be required to enter into a
Market Square lease space agreement with the city at the time of reservation.
All lease space fees must be paid at the time of making the reservation. Lease
space fees are:
Agricultural and artist/craftsperson vendors (no electricity, no    No charge
water)
Agricultural and artist/craftsperson vendors (under metal awnings;  $10 per day
with electricity, with water)
Ware vendors (with electricity, with water)                         $10 per day
Food vendors (with electricity, with water)                         $25 per day
Special event rental of entire Market Square 6 hours                $300
Special event rental of entire Market Square 12 hours               $500
Special event rental of entire Market Square 24 hours               $800
Special event rental of entire Market Square 48 hours               $1000
Special event rental of entire Market Square 72 hours               $1500
The city may waive lease space fees for special events sponsored by No charge
a not for profit organization
The city may waive lease space fees for special events sponsored by No charge
a city in Johnson County or by Johnson County
 
   (B)   A city health permit will be required for food vendors who distribute,
offer for sale, or sell food which is prepackaged or prepared on-site. All food
vendors must meet all requirements of the Texas Food Establishment Rules found
in Title 25, Chapter 229, Subchapter K, of the Texas Administrative Code, as
amended, and §
105.09, Vendor Requirements, of this chapter. Health permits may be obtained
from the City of Cleburne Health Department or on-line at the city website. An
application for a health permit and payment of fee should be made at least 48
hours in advance of a scheduled event. Permit fees are listed in
Chapter 94 of the Code of Ordinances. Food vendors with an approved City of
Cleburne Health Department annual permit may operate at Market Square under
such permit. Food vendors without an approved City of Cleburne Health
Department annual permit shall obtain a temporary health permit from the City
of Cleburne Health Department for each special event they set up at Market
Square.
   (C)   A Texas Department of State Health Services manufacturer's license
required for the sale of prepackaged foods, sauces, or produce that is
packaged. These products must meet all manufactured food labeling requirements
of the Department of State Health Services.
   (D)   Sales tax certificates must be present for those vendors required to
pay sales tax as stated by the Comptroller's Office.
(Ord. 06-2013-40, passed 7-9-13; Am. Ord. 10-2014-84, passed 10-14- 14)
§ 105.09 VENDOR REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All structures must be removed at the end of each day unless otherwise
permitted by the city. Vendors setting up portable awnings, canopies, or tents
may not insert stakes into the concrete or use bricks to secure such
structures. These structures may be secured by the use of buckets filled with
sand, cement or water. Exception: during a permitted special event, with an
approved special event permit vendor booths and wares may remain on Market
Square until the end of the special event.
   (B)   Vendors are responsible for their children and guest(s) at all times.
Children must be supervised at all times and may not run freely through the
market or cause disruption of other vendors and customers.
   (C)   Vendors are responsible for the merchandise, security and liability of
their booths and persons. Vendors shall indemnify and hold the city harmless
from any and all loss or cost of damages.
   (D)   Smoking is prohibited at the Market Square.
   (E)   Animals, other than service animals, are prohibited at Market Square
unless otherwise permitted by the city.
   (F)   Firearms are prohibited upon the property of Market Square.
   (G)   Market Square may not be used without city authorization or during
"closed hours".
   (H)   All vendors must cease operation by 8:00 p.m. each day and vacate the
premise no later than 9:00 p.m. each day. No equipment, agricultural products,
wares, vehicles, refrigerators, trailers, awnings, tents, tables, chairs, or
other items may be left at Market Square at the end of each day. All trash and
debris must be removed by the vendor at the end of each day or the close of the
special event. A cleanup fee of $100 will be charged to the vendor if the city
has to remove any trash, debris or products left behind by the vendor. Products
or items left at Market Square will be removed by the city and the responsible
vendor will not be allowed to rent a lease space for a period of six months.
Exception: during a permitted special event with an approved city special event
permit, vendor booths and wares may remain on the property until the end of the
special event.
   (I)   Vendors requiring electricity are responsible for providing and
maintaining electrical appliances and devices. Extension cords and other
electrical appliances/devices must have the rated capacity to supply the
electrical equipment serviced. Extension cords and other electrical appliances/
devices must be tested and listed in published reports of inspected electrical
equipment by an approving agency. Extension cords and other electrical
appliances/devices that are damaged or hazardous are prohibited. Mats should be
used to cover all portions of the cord that lay in any walking area to help
prevent trip hazards. Vendors may not use tape to cover cords.
   (J)   Vendors may only access electrical service distribution panels to
power circuit breakers on or off. All electrical connections must be made
through approved and installed electrical receptacles. Other than stated above,
vendors shall not remove covers, access, alter or tamper with electrical
service distribution panels at Market Square.
   (K)   Vendors may not dump oil, wastewater, or any other refuse (including
clean water and/or ice) into the storm drains, landscaping or any other area
around the Market Square.
   (L)   Vendors may not sell any live animals, including, but not limited to
dogs, cats, reptiles, birds, rodents, poultry, fish, or livestock.
   (M)   Vendors may not sell resale or garage sale items. All resale items
must be sold within an approved flea market.
(Ord. 06-2013-40, passed 7-9-13; Am. Ord. 10-2014-84, passed 10-14-14; Am. Ord.
03-2015-20, passed 3-24-15)
§ 105.10 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR AGRICULTURAL VENDORS.
   (A)   Agricultural vendors must reserve a lease space as specified in §
105.08. Agricultural vendors not using water or electricity are exempt from
lease space fees.
   (B)   Agricultural vendors must be set up in a designated lease space,
either underneath the provided metal awning, under a canopy or tent with a
water repellent roof or ceiling that provides overhead protection of products.
Agricultural vendors shall not set up vendor booths in parking areas adjacent
to Market Square.
   (C)   Products left unattended by the owner for a period of four hours may
be removed from the lease space by the city and all rights to the lease space
shall be forfeited. The city shall have the right to remove and dispose of such
product without liability.
   (D)   Agricultural vendors may sell "ungraded" farm eggs produced by their
own flocks directly to the consumer if the agricultural vendor is licensed by
the City of Cleburne Health Department. The farm eggs must be labeled with the
producer’s name and address and labeled as "ungraded" in legible printed
boldface type. Raw eggs must be maintained and stored under refrigeration at 41
degrees or less. The packaging of the shell eggs must include the following
safe handling statement on the label of the packaging: SAFE HANDLING
INSTRUCTIONS To prevent illness from bacteria: keep eggs refrigerated, cook
eggs until yolks are firm, and cook foods containing eggs thoroughly.
   (E)   Agricultural vendors must obtain a city health permit to display cut
produce, sell cut produce, or provide product samples. Displayed produce must
be sealed, wrapped, or covered.
   (F)   Agricultural vendors selling value added products intended for human
consumption must meet all State of Texas labeling and packaging requirements
and hold a State of Texas Food Handlers certificate from the city. Value added
products for human consumption include jams, jellies, honey, baked goods that
do not require refrigeration; such as cakes cookies, breads, pastries, candy,
coated and uncoated nuts, unroasted nut butters, fruit butters, fruit pies,
dehydrated fruits and vegetables, and dried beans.
   (G)   Value added products designed for animal use or consumption are
prohibited.
(Ord. 06-2013-40, passed 7-9-13; Am. Ord. 10-2014-84, passed 10-14- 14)
§ 105.11 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   Lease spaces for special events will be available only to those
vendors authorized by the special event permit.
   (B)   Not for profit organizations requesting a waiver of lease space fees
for a special event must have a verifiable affiliation in Johnson County and be
classified as a charitable organization in accordance with section 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code. Waiver of lease space fees for a not for profit
organization may be limited to one time per calendar year.
   (C)   A deposit of $400 will be required for all special event rentals of
Market Square. The deposit will be forfeited if the Market Square is damaged
during the special event or requires cleaning by city.
   (D)   Food vendors and ware vendors will be allowed at Market Square only in
conjunction with a permitted special event.
   (E)   All food vendors must obtain a city health permit as stated in §
105.08(B).
   (F)   Food vendors must set up in a specified lease space. All food vendors
should be set up either underneath the provided metal awning, under a canopy or
tent with a water repellent roof or ceiling that provides overhead protection
of food. All portable tents, canopies, and awnings must be removed by the end
of the special event.
   (G)   Mobile food trucks, with an approved health permit issued by the city,
will be allowed to park in approved parking spaces designated by the special
event permit.
   (H)   Mobile food trucks must have generators and will not be allowed to
connect to electrical services at the Market Square.
   (I)   A health inspection will be performed on the first day of setup.
Inspections may also be performed at other times during the special event.
   (J)   All foods must be obtained from sources that comply with applicable
laws and are licensed by the state regulatory authority having jurisdiction
over the processing and distribution of food.
   (K)   All foods must be prepared:
      (1)   On site with a temporary health permit; or
      (2)   Within a mobile food truck with an annual or temporary health
permit; or
      (3)   At a food service facility with an annual or temporary health
permit; or
      (4)   In accordance with the State of Texas Cottage Law regulations.
   (L)   All potentially hazardous foods must be transported, stored, and
cooked at proper temperatures. Refrigerated foods must be maintained below 41
degrees. Hot foods must be held at 135 degrees or above. A metal stem
thermometer must be used to ensure proper temperatures.
   (M)   All food items intended for human consumption must be stored at least
six inches off the ground at all times and be in safe and sound condition with
adequate protection from splash, dust, insects, weather or other contamination.
   (N)   Ice must be clean, safe and of a commercial grade. Ice for human
consumption must be stored separately from iced used to cold hold other foods
and drinks. Ice for human consumption should be dispensed with an ice scoop.
Styrofoam chests may not be used for hot or cold storage. Ice used to cool
packaged foods or beverages should be continuously drained.
   (O)   All food on display must be kept sealed, wrapped or covered.
   (P)   All prepackaged foods must be properly labeled. Any unlabeled foods,
improperly labeled foods or foods that are found being held at improper
temperatures may be detained or immediately condemned by the city health
inspection officer. Violations may result in citations to the operator and/or
owner or revocation of the health permit.
   (Q)   All food lease spaces must completely prohibit the public from gaining
access to the interior of the booth or food prep areas.
   (R)   All food lease spaces must contain at least one five pound certified
ABC fire extinguisher.
   (S)   A hand wash station must be provided and equipped with potable water,
dispensable hand soap and paper towels. All wastewater must be captured and not
allowed to drain onto the ground.
   (T)   Only single service disposable items will be used for customer
service. Lease spaces must be equipped with a three basin wash system for ware
washing. Set up must include soapy wash water, clear rinse water, and a
chemical sanitizer basin. Dishwater must be properly disposed and not allowed
to drain onto the ground or street.
   (U)   Food handlers must wear clean clothing and proper hair restraints
including hairnets, caps, or visors. Hand washing must be done as frequently
and necessary as required by health guidelines. Disposable gloves must be worn
when handling "ready to eat" foods. Tongs, spoons, or tissues may be used in
substitution when appropriate. Eating, drinking, or smoking will be confined to
designated areas away from food preparation and service areas.
(Ord. 06-2013-40, passed 7-9-13; Am. Ord. 10-2014-84, passed 10-14- 14)
§ 105.12 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Cleburne Health Department, the Cleburne Fire Department or the Cleburne
Police Department may enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 06-2013-40, passed 7-9-13; Am. Ord. 10-2014-84, passed 10-14- 14)
§ 105.13 RIGHT TO REFUSE STALL RENTAL; EJECTION OF PERSON RENTING STALLS;
OPERATION THROUGH AGENT AFTER REJECTION.
   (A)   The city may refuse to rent a lease space to a vendor who has
repeatedly violated a provision of this chapter or a regulation promulgated by
the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The city may eject from Market Square, a vendor or any other person
who refuses to abide by the provisions of this chapter or a regulation
promulgated by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
city may eject a vendor without refunding rental, permit, or license fees paid.
   (C)   Operation through agent after rejection. A person shall not act as an
agent or employee of a vendor who has been barred from Market Square by the
city. Conversely, a vendor shall not hire as an agent or employee a person who
has been barred from Market Square by the city.
(Ord. 06-2013-40, passed 7-9-13; Am. Ord. 10-2014-84, passed 10-14- 14)
§ 105.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter for
which no other penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty set forth
in §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined not to exceed $2,000 for each offense. Each
day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 06-2013-40, passed 7-9-13; Am. Ord. 10-2014-84, passed 10-14-14)
CHAPTER 106: DONATION BOXES
Section
   
106.01   Definitions
   
106.02   Applicability
   
106.03   Permit and decal required
   
106.04   Permit requirements
   
106.05   Application for permits
   
106.06   Transfer of permit prohibited
   
106.07   Location restricted
   
106.08   Impoundment of donation boxes
   
106.09   Maintenance and upkeep
   
106.10   Revocation of permit
   
106.11   Fees
 
   
106.99   Penalty
§ 106.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DONATION BOX. Any box, container, building, trailer, or other receptacle
that is intended for use as a collection point for donated clothing or other
household materials.
   PERSON. An individual, sole proprietorship, corporation, association,
nonprofit corporation, partnership, joint venture, a limited liability company,
estate, trust, public or private organization, or any other legal entity.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 106.02 APPLICABILITY.
   The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all donation boxes
regardless of whether said boxes were placed prior to the effective date of
these regulations. No previously placed donation boxes shall be granted any
legally non-conforming rights under this chapter or any other chapter of this
code.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 106.03 PERMIT AND DECAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain, or allow to
be placed or maintained, any donation box within the jurisdiction of the city,
without having first secured a permit and decal in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person that owns, leases, is in control
of, or is entitled to possession of real property within the jurisdiction of
the city to authorize or allow any donation box to be placed on or remain on
such real property without a valid permit decal in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 106.04 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   A permit and decal to allow a donation box to be placed and used on
designated real property may be issued by the city after inspection and
verification that the following conditions are satisfied:
   (A)   The person receiving a permit to place or maintain a donation box is
registered to operate in the State of Texas as a non-profit corporation or has
proof of a written agreement to solicit on behalf of such a non-profit
corporation.
   (B)   The real property owner provides written authorization, with the
signature notarized or on the property owner's company letterhead, allowing the
donation box on the property.
   (C)   The permit holder agrees to be responsible for collecting the contents
of the donation box in order to prevent overflow and littering.
   (D)   No more than one donation box may be permitted for placement on any
one lot. In the case of a shopping center or office development that consists
of multiple platted lots, the administrator shall treat the shopping center or
office development as if it is only one contiguous lot.
   (E)   The base area of a donation box shall not exceed 50 square feet in
size.
   (F)   Each donation box shall clearly indicate in writing on the side of
each box that all donations must fit into and be placed within the donation
box.
   (G)   The permit holder placing or maintaining the donation box shall
display current contact information including street address and phone number
on the donation box. Said information must be readable and clearly visible to
the public.
   (H)   Each donation box shall be constructed from a sturdy, weather
resistant material.
   (I)   Each donation box shall be painted one solid color. No high-intensity
or fluorescent colors shall be used for the donation box or associated signage.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 106.05 APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.
   (A)   Applicants for permits under this chapter shall file a written, sworn
application with the city. The application shall include the written
authorization of the property owner allowing the donation box on the property.
   (B)   A separate permit and application shall be required for each donation
box regardless of the ownership thereof. Permits issued under the provisions of
this chapter shall be valid only at the address stated on the permit.
   (C)   An annual permit fee for each donation box shall be required. All
permits shall expire on December 31 of each calendar year regardless of the
date of issuance; provided, however, that the fee for each permit shall be
prorated for each month or portion of a month for which the permit is issued.
   (D)   Any person denied a permit shall have the right to appeal such action.
In such case the procedure shall be the same as in revocation.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 106.06 TRANSFER OF PERMIT PROHIBITED.
   No permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferrable
and the authority a permit confers shall be conferred only on the permit holder
named therein.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 106.07 LOCATION RESTRICTED.
   Donation boxes shall only be permitted to be placed on real property in any
zoning district on which a parking lot is maintained by a business that is in
operation. Only one donation box will be allowed on a shared parking lot.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 106.08 IMPOUNDMENT OF DONATION BOXES.
   Any donation box located within the jurisdiction of the city that does not
have a current, valid permit or any permitted donation box that has received
more than two notices of violation from the city in the past 12 months shall be
subject to impoundment by the city. Any donation box impounded by the city
shall be released to the owner upon payment of all applicable impoundment and
storage fees.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 106.09 MAINTENANCE AND UPKEEP.
   (A)   The permit holder and the property owner shall be held jointly and
severally liable and responsible for the maintenance, upkeep, and servicing of
the donation box and clean up and removal of any donations left on the property
outside of the donation box. Any maintenance, service or cleanup associated
with a donation box shall be completed within 48 hours of notification by the
city.
   (B)   The city shall have the authority to abate any property in violation
of this chapter that is deemed a public nuisance under any other provisions of
this code.
   (C)   The visual and structural integrity of the donation box must be
maintained continuously.
   (D)   The placement of the donation box shall not impede traffic nor
visually impair any motor vehicle operation within a parking lot, driveway, or
street.
   (E)   The donation box shall not be located in a required building setback,
buffer yard, access easement, drainage easement, floodplain, driveway, utility
easement, or fire lane.
   (F)   At least one stacking or parking space shall be required for use of
persons accessing the donation box.
   (G)   The donation box may not block or occupy any number of parking spaces
required by the primary use structure.
   (H)   The current permit decal for the specific donation box must be affixed
and displayed at all times on the outside of the donation box.
   (I)   The donation box shall only be used for the solicitation and
collection of clothing and household materials. All donation materials must fit
into and be placed inside the donation box. The collection or storage of any
materials outside the container is strictly prohibited.
   (J)   No donation box shall be permitted to be placed or remain placed
within 200 feet from a residential zoning district, or residential use. Said
distance shall be measured from the donation box to the lot line of the
residential use or residentially zoned property.
   (K)   The donation box shall be continuously maintained in compliance with
all requirements imposed by §
106.04, as amended.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 106.10 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Grounds. Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked by the city if the
permit holder has received two notices of violation for violations of this
chapter or any other provision of this code within a 12-month time period or
has knowingly made a false material statement in the application or otherwise
becomes disqualified for the issuance of a permit under the terms of this
chapter.
   (B)   Notice. Notice of the revocation shall be given to the permit holder
in writing, with the reasons for the revocation specified in the notice, served
either by personal service or by certified United States mail to their last
known address. The revocation shall become effective the day following personal
service or if mailed, three days from the date of mailing.
   (C)   Appeal; hearing. The permit holder shall have ten days from the date
of such revocation in which to file written notice of their appeal from the
order revoking said permit. Upon receipt of an appeal request, a hearing shall
be set not later than 15 days after the notice of the appeal is filed. At the
hearing, the City Council shall consider whether the facts establish grounds
for the revocation under the terms of division (A) and shall issue a written
determination to the permit holder. The City Council's decision shall be final.
   (D)   Stay. Any appeal of revocation pursuant to this section shall stay the
revocation until said revocation is finalized.
   (E)   Removal of box; impoundment. Upon finalization of any revocation, the
permit holder shall remove said donation box no later than ten days after said
final decision. Upon expiration of this ten-day grace period, the donation box
shall acquire noncompliant status and be subject to immediate impoundment
without further notice.
   (F)   One-year waiting period. In the event the permit of any permit holder
is revoked by the city, no second or additional permit shall be issued to such
person within one year of the date such permit revocation was finalized.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 106.11 FEES.
   All fees established by this chapter shall be in an amount set by resolution
of the City Council. The permit fee shall be $45.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 106.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It is an offense for a person, firm, or corporation to violate,
disobey, omit, neglect, refuse to comply with, or resist the enforcement of any
of the provisions of this chapter. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense. An offense under this section is a
Class C misdemeanor. Any offense for which no other penalty is set forth in
this chapter shall be subject to the penalty set forth in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an
offense under this section.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall limit the remedies available to the city
in seeking to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   All other legal remedies are reserved by the city if necessary to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. This shall be in addition to, and not
in lieu of, the criminal penalties provided for in this section.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
110.   AMBULANCES
         
111.   AMUSEMENTS
         
112.   MULTI-CHANNEL SERVICES PROVIDERS
         
113.   FIRE PROTECTION BUSINESS
         
114.   HOTELS AND MOTELS
         
115.   JUNK DEALERS
         
116.   SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS AND HANDBILL DISTRIBUTION
         
117.   TAXIS; BUSES
         
118.   OIL AND GAS DRILLING; MINERAL EXPLORATION
         
119.   WRECKERS
         
120.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
         
121.   SMOKING
Cross-reference:
   Airport, see
Ch. 90
   Affirmative action plan to apply to certain city business opportunities, see
§
34.01
   Commercial operations at Lake Pat Cleburne, see §§
98.045 et seq.
   Commercial activities at airport, see §§
90.050 et seq.
   Garage sales, see
Ch. 95
   Fair Housing, see
Ch. 100
   Railroads, see
Ch. 73
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 99
CHAPTER 110: AMBULANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
110.001   Definitions
   
110.002   Definitions
   
110.003   Purpose
Emergency Service
   
110.015   Authority at emergency incidents
   
110.016   Provision of ambulance service
   
110.017   One ambulance provider to be designated
   
110.018   Ambulance response procedure
   
110.019   Ambulance service records
   
110.020   City ambulance service fees
Permit
   
110.030   Required
   
110.031   Exceptions
   
110.032   Application
   
110.033   Requirements for permit
   
110.034   Issuance
   
110.035   Causes for revocation, alteration, suspension
   
110.036   Revocation procedure; appeal
   
110.037   Permit fees
   
110.038   Liability insurance
   
110.039   Acceptance of permit; compliance
   
110.040   Operators possessing previously issued permit
 
   
110.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Emergency management and civil preparedness, see
Ch. 32
   Power of city to regulate vehicles, see Charter §
2.1(C)(12)
   Traffic, see
Title VII
   Traffic provisions relating to ambulances, see §§
70.07,
71.15,
71.45
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.001 CREATION.
   The City of Cleburne Fire Department-based ambulance service is hereby
created.
(Ord. 04-2003-14, passed 4-22-03)
§ 110.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT (ALS). Special services designed to provide definitive
pre-hospital emergency medical care including, but not limited to,
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, cardiac monitoring, cardiac defibrillation,
advanced airway management, intravenous therapy, administration of specified
drugs, and other medicinal preparations, and other specified techniques and
procedures administered by authorized personnel under the direct supervision of
a base hospital or utilizing approved pre-hospital treatment protocols or
standing orders as part of the local EMS system at the scene of an emergency,
during transport to an acute care hospital or other approved facility, during
inter-facility transfer, and while in the emergency department of an acute care
hospital until responsibility is assumed by the emergency department or other
medical staff of that hospital.
   ALS1. Transportation by ground ambulance vehicle, medically necessary
supplies and services and either an ALS assessment by ALS personnel or the
provision of at least one ALS intervention.
   ALS2. Either transportation by ground ambulance vehicle, medically necessary
supplies and services, and the administration of at least three medications by
intravenous push/bolus or by continuous infusion excluding crystalloid,
hypotonic, isotonic, and hypertonic solutions (Dextrose, Normal Saline,
Ringer's Lactate); or transportation, medically necessary supplies and
services, and the provision of at least one of the following ALS procedures:
      (1)   Defibrillation/Cardioversion;
      (2)   Endotracheal intubation;
      (3)   Central venous line;
      (4)   Cardiac pacing;
      (5)   Chest decompression;
      (6)   Surgical airway; or
      (7)   Intraosseous line.
   AMBULANCE. Any motor vehicle constructed, reconstructed, arranged, equipped
or used for the purpose of transporting ill, sick, or injured persons.
   AMBULANCE PROVIDER. A person or entity that operates, or causes the
operation of, an ambulance service.
   AMBULANCE SERVICE. The activity, business, or service for hire, profit, or
otherwise of transporting one or more persons by ambulance upon any of the
streets, roads, highways, alleys, or any public way or place whether ALS, BLS,
or MICU.
   APPLICANT. Any person or entity which makes application for a permit
prescribed by this chapter.
   BASIC LIFE SUPPORT (BLS). Emergency first aid and cardiopulmonary
resuscitation medical care procedures which, as a minimum, include recognizing
respiratory and cardiac arrest and starting proper application of
cardiopulmonary resuscitation to maintain life without invasive techniques,
unless authorized by state law or regulation, until the victim may be
transported or until ALS medical care is available.
   CITY. The City of Cleburne, Texas.
   EMS SYSTEM. The interrelated but separate public and private entities
including, but not limited to, ambulance providers, fire departments, and
hospitals which, optimally, work together in the timely and appropriate
provision of emergency medical services to the citizens and visitors of the
city.
   EMERGENCY. Any circumstance that calls for immediate action and which the
element of time in transporting the sick, wounded, or injured for medical
treatment is essential to the health or life of the person. Such circumstances
include, but are not limited to, accidents generally, traffic accidents, sudden
illnesses and acts of violence resulting in personal injury.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE CALL. Any sudden or serious illness or injury
requiring immediate medical attention, where delay in providing medical
services may aggravate the medical condition or cause the loss of life.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES VEHICLE.
      (1)   A basic life-support emergency medical services vehicle;
      (2)   An advanced life-support emergency medical services vehicle;
      (3)   A mobile intensive-care unit; or
      (4)   A specialized emergency medical services vehicle.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-BASIC (EMT-B). A person certified to render BLS
medical care as required by the State of Texas.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC (EMT-P). A person certified to render
ALS medical care as required by the State of Texas.
   ENTITY. Any public or private organization, firm, partnership, association.
   MEDICAL CARE. Any medical care rendered by an appropriately certified and/or
licensed person.
   MEDICAL DIRECTOR. That physician designated to serve as the Medical Director
of the EMS Agency pursuant to the Tex. Health and Safety Code § 1797.202.
   NON-EMERGENCY MEDICAL CALL. The scheduled transport of a patient in which
the non-immediate transport would not aggravate the medical condition of the
patient or cause the loss of life.
   PATIENT. Any person in the process of receiving medical care.
   PERMIT HOLDER. A person or entity possessing a valid city issued permit to
operate an ambulance service within the City of Cleburne.
   PERMIT. The written authorization issued by the city for a designated
ambulance provider to operate an ambulance service within the City of Cleburne.
(Am. Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03)
§ 110.003 PURPOSE.
   The regulation of ambulances and ambulance service as herein established has
been made in the exercise of the sound discretion of the City Council and the
City Council finds that such regulations are necessary for the purpose of
promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the community; that such
regulations have been designed to lessen congestion by emergency vehicles on
the public streets and to secure safety to pedestrians and vehicles using the
public streets and thoroughfares; that such regulations are necessary to
protect health, life and property; that such regulations apply to all operators
of ambulances as a whole, operating for hire under emergency conditions or
otherwise on the streets and public thoroughfares, in such a manner as to
minimize the hazards and dangers inherent in the operations of ambulances under
emergency conditions; and that public necessity requires that such regulations
be adopted to preserve and enforce the health, safety and welfare and the good
order and security of the city and its inhabitants. These regulations are
adopted by the City Council pursuant to the Tex. Health and Safety Code §
773.051 which provides that municipalities may establish standards for
ambulances.
(Am. Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03)
EMERGENCY SERVICE
§ 110.015 AUTHORITY AT EMERGENCY INCIDENTS.
   The Cleburne Fire Department, utilizing the incident management system,
shall direct such operations as are necessary to extinguish or control any
fire, perform any rescue operation or take any other action necessary in the
reasonable performance of duty to protect life or property. Ambulance providers
operating under a permit from the city shall be familiar with, and capable of
operating under the incident management system.
(Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03)
§ 110.016 PROVISION OF AMBULANCE SERVICE.
   (A)   The city shall make provision for ambulance service for the City of
Cleburne.
   (B)   In addition to any ambulance service that is provided by the Cleburne
Fire Department, the city may contract all or part of the ambulance service for
the city to a state licensed ambulance provider for the provision of emergency
and non-emergency ambulance service within the city. The contracted ambulance
provider must meet the permitting requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03)
§ 110.017 ONE AMBULANCE PROVIDER TO BE DESIGNATED.
   In order to lessen congestion by emergency vehicles on the public streets
and to facilitate the prompt dispatch of emergency ambulances when needed to
protect life and health, it is determined that the City Council may designate
one ambulance provider to provide emergency ambulance service for the city,
pursuant to the procedure hereinafter provided, in addition to the emergency
ambulance service that may be provided by the Cleburne Fire Department. If the
City Council designates one sole ambulance provider, it shall do so pursuant to
a request for proposal process that awards to the ambulance provider selected
the right to provide all ambulance services in the city, except those
specifically exempted by this chapter. When a sole ambulance provider has been
so designated by the City Council, the city shall not issue ambulance permits
to other ambulance service providers.
(Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03)
§ 110.018 AMBULANCE RESPONSE PROCEDURE.
   Any ambulance not dispatched by the city, shall not respond to any emergency
call within the city without first having notified Cleburne dispatch of the
nature and destination of the call. In cases where additional ambulances are
needed, Cleburne dispatch shall authorize the response by such other ambulances
as requested.
(Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03)
§ 110.019 AMBULANCE SERVICE RECORDS.
   Each permit holder shall maintain a daily manifest upon which shall be
recorded the time, date, place of origin, patient's name and address,
destination, and charges for each trip. Each such permit holder shall retain
and preserve all daily manifests for at least one year, and such manifests
shall be available for inspection by the city upon request. Each permit holder
hereunder shall keep accurate records of the receipts and expenses from
operations and such other operating information as may be required by the city.
Each such permit holder shall maintain such records at a place readily
accessible for examination by the city.
(Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03)
§ 110.020 CITY AMBULANCE SERVICE FEES.
   (A)   A fee shall be charged by the ambulance provider per trip for the
transportation by ambulance of a person or persons to a hospital providing
emergency medical aid, in response to a call received by the Fire Department
for ambulance service. Such fee shall be established by ordinance.
   (B)   The person receiving ambulance service and any person contracting for
the service shall be responsible for the payment of the fee. In the case of
service received by a minor, the parent or guardian of the minor shall be
responsible for the payment of the fee.
   (C)   The city may contract with a billing service entity for the collection
of ambulance service fees.
   (D)   The following fees shall be assessed for emergency medical services:
      (1)   BLS non-emergency transport fee of $850 shall be assessed per
person, per transport.
      (2)   BLS emergency transport fee of $1,100 shall be assessed per person,
per transport.
      (3)   BLS oxygen therapy fee of $50 shall be assessed per person, per
transport.
      (4)   BLS disposable medical supply fee of $75 shall be assessed per
person, per transport.
      (5)   ALS non-emergency transport fee of $1,000 shall be assessed per
person, per transport.
      (6)   ALS1 emergency transport fee of $1,500 shall be assessed per
person, per transport.
      (7)   ALS2 emergency transport fee of $1,950 shall be assessed per
person, per transport.
      (8)   ALS oxygen therapy fee of $50 shall be assessed per person, per
transport.
      (9)   ALS disposable medical supply fee of $175 shall be assessed per
person, per transport.
      (10)   An additional mileage fee of $25 per loaded mile shall be
assessed.
      (11)   A critical care emergency transport fee of $5,500 shall be
assessed per person, per transport, with an additional mileage fee of $50 per
loaded mile shall be assessed during critical care transports.
      (12)   A fee of $100 per hour for ambulance/ALS unit standby shall be
assessed for all standby requests.
      (13)   A fee of $200 shall be assessed for medical examiner requested
transport.
   (E)   The City Manager or his or her designee shall implement an ambulance
charity care policy and the procedure for administering the policy.
(Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03; Am. Ord. 07-2007-40, passed 7-24- 07; Am.
Ord. 01-2016-04, passed 1-26-16; Am. Ord. 08-2016-38, passed 8-9-16; Am. Ord.
09-2019-55, passed 9-24-19)
PERMIT
§ 110.030 REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate or cause to be operated in the city any ambulance or
other emergency medical service vehicle used or equipped for the transportation
or conveyance of the sick or injured without first having secured a permit from
the city.
(Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03)
§ 110.031 EXCEPTIONS.
   No permit shall be required for:
   (A)   The Cleburne Fire Department operating a city provided ambulance
service.
   (B)   Any licensed ambulance provider when called upon by the city to render
assistance during a catastrophe or major emergency when the ambulances
authorized to operate in the city by permit are either insufficient in number
or inadequate for any other reason.
   (C)   Any licensed ambulance provider operating from a location outside the
city and transports any patient from a point of origin outside the city to a
destination inside the city.
(Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03)
§ 110.032 APPLICATION.
   Applications for provider permit for the operation of ambulance service
within the city shall be in written form prescribed by the city, signed and
sworn to by the applicant, and shall be filed with the City Secretary.
(Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03)
§ 110.033 REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   All persons operating an ambulance under the provisions of this
chapter shall have in their possession:
      (1)   An appropriate, valid driver's license issued by the State of
Texas; and
      (2)   A current Texas Department of Health EMS certification.
   (B)   No person shall operate or allow the operation of any ambulance for
which a permit has been issued under this chapter, on an emergency call, unless
such ambulance is attended by:
      (1)   At least one emergency medical technician basic (EMT-B), and one
paramedic (EMT-P) meeting the provisions of this chapter, or a person who is
the holder of a valid current physician's license or certificate.
      (2)   Persons acting under the direction of the incident commander at the
scene when a mass casualty incident has occurred.
   (C)   No person shall operate or allow the operation of any ambulance for
which a permit has been issued under this chapter, on an emergency call, unless
such ambulance is equipped with at least:
      (1)   The minimum equipment and supplies as required by the State of
Texas for a mobile intensive care unit (MICU); or
      (2)   The minimum equipment and supplies as required by the State of
Texas for an advanced life support ambulance (ALS); or
      (3)   For response to mass casualty incidents or non-emergency medical
calls, the minimum equipment and supplies as required by the State of Texas for
a basic life support ambulance (BLS).
   (D)   Permit holders operating ambulance service within the City of Cleburne
shall be capable of communicating to the Fire Department and Cleburne dispatch
via assigned two-way radio frequency.
(Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03)
§ 110.034 ISSUANCE.
   The City Secretary shall issue a permit, required by this chapter, only if
the ambulance provider meets all requirements of this chapter. Permits may be
revoked, altered or suspended by the city in accordance with §§
110.035 and
110.036.
(Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03)
§ 110.035 CAUSES FOR REVOCATION, ALTERATION, SUSPENSION.
   Every permit issued hereunder shall be subject to revocation, alteration or
suspension by the city where it shall appear that one or more of the following
conditions exist:
   (A)   The permit was obtained by an application in which any material fact
was intentionally omitted or falsely stated;
   (B)   The permit holder has persisted in permitting emergency medical
service vehicles to be operated in violation of any law;
   (C)   The permit holder has willfully and knowingly violated or failed to
comply with any of the provisions hereof;
   (D)   The permit holder's insurance, as required herein, has been cancelled,
withdrawn or terminated.
(Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03)
§ 110.036 REVOCATION PROCEDURE; APPEAL.
   (A)   The city may at any time give notice in writing to a permit holder or
other person in control of the operation and maintenance of such ambulance
service that the permit issued for the operation and maintenance of such
ambulance service has been revoked. The notice of revocation shall become a
final revocation after the expiration of five days from the date of the service
of same unless, on or before the expiration of such five days, the permit
holder shall file with the City Secretary a written appeal of such revocation.
   (B)   The appeal shall operate as a stay of revocation of the permit issued
until such time as the City Council shall grant a hearing and make a final
adjudication. The hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date of filing
of the appeal, and such action and judgment of the Council, after hearing all
the evidence and facts, shall be final and conclusive as to all parties.
(Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03)
§ 110.037 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   No permit shall be issued unless the applicant thereof shall have paid
an initial permit application fee of $250 payable in advance with the
application to the city for the right to engage in the ambulance business in
and upon the public streets and thoroughfares of the city. Each permit issued
hereunder shall be valid for one calendar year beginning January 1 and ending
December 31 of such year, and any ambulance provider desiring to continue
operations hereunder shall make application for renewal of permit prior to
December 1 of any year for the privilege of operating during the following
calendar year. Renewal applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee
of $150. The permit application fees herein shall be nonrefundable.
   (B)   The amount of the permit fee herein prescribed shall not be prorated
for fractional parts of a calendar year, nor shall it relieve the ambulance
provider from the necessity of obtaining any federal, state or county
occupation license or any other requirement established by statute. Permits
issued hereunder shall not be transferable or assignable without the consent of
the City Council.
(Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03)
§ 110.038 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   Each operator shall purchase and keep in full force and effect public
liability insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000 for each person,
$3,000,000 for each accident, and $100,000 for property damage, to secure
payment of all lawful and proper claims arising out of the operations of the
ambulance service authorized hereunder. A written statement from an authorized
agent of the operator's insurance carrier verifying the issuance of such
insurance shall be filed with the City Secretary before any certificate or
permit may be issued. All such verifications of insurance shall provide for a
30-day cancellation notice to the city.
(Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03)
§ 110.039 ACCEPTANCE OF PERMIT; COMPLIANCE.
   By acceptance of a permit authorized to be issued pursuant to this chapter,
any ambulance provider expressly stipulates and agrees to be bound by the terms
of this chapter and comply with the provisions contained herein.
(Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03)
§ 110.040 OPERATORS POSSESSING PREVIOUSLY ISSUED PERMIT.
   Any ambulance provider who currently operates non-emergency and/or emergency
service within the city and who possesses a city previously issued permit shall
not be required to file an original application.
(Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03)
§ 110.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and each day the violation continues shall be a
separate offense. Each offense shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
$2,000.
(Ord. 09-2003-48, passed 9-23-03)
CHAPTER 111: AMUSEMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Carnivals, circuses and similar shows
Dances and Dance Halls
   
111.30   Permit required
   
111.31   Application
   
111.32   Approval or disapproval of application by Chief of Police
   
111.33   Issuance
   
111.34   Not to issue for taxi dance hall
   
111.35   Contents
   
111.36   Posting
   
111.37   Term of dance hall permit; no refund of fee
   
111.38   Not assignable; transfer to new location
   
111.39   Does not grant vested rights
   
111.40   Revocation or cancellation
Pool Halls, Recreation or Family Centers and Business Establishments with
Recreation and Amusement Machines
Part 1: General Provisions
   
111.50   Definitions
   
111.51   Occupation tax
   
111.52   Location of recreation or amusement machines
   
111.53   Partitions; sanitary facilities
   
111.54   Hours of operation
   
111.55   Minor's presence restricted
   
111.56   Penalty for failure to pay occupation tax
   
111.57   Inspections
Part 2: License
   
111.65   License required
   
111.66   Fee
   
111.67   Sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited
   
111.68   Term; nontransferable
   
111.69   Display
   
111.70   Revocation
 
   
111.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Commercial recreation establishments in C-2 and C-3 zoning districts, see §
155.39
   Special use permits for commercial amusement and recreation facilities, see
§
155.31
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES AND SIMILAR SHOWS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   CARNIVAL.  A collection of shows under canvas, ferris wheels, merry-go-
rounds, doll racks, knife racks, and the usual paraphernalia of street
carnivals.
   CIRCUS. Any wild animal show under canvas, acrobatic exhibitions under
canvas, gymnastic exhibitions under canvas, ring performance under canvas, and
the usual paraphernalia and performances of the ring circus. The term “circus”
shall not only be construed to mean and embrace every show or exhibition
commonly known as a circus, but shall include menageries and any combination of
circus and menagerie.
   (B)   Exception. This section shall not apply, however, to any charitable
organization or local theaters that have for their purpose educational or
charitable benefits or any dramatic performances for church purposes.
   (C)   Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, locate, set up,
conduct or operate a carnival, collection of shows under canvas, or a circus
within the corporate limits of the city without a permit so to do issued by the
City Manager.
   (D)   Tax on street parades.
      (1)   Every circus and traveling show which shall make a public parade on
any of the streets of the city shall be and the same is required to pay a
special tax for said privilege as follows:
         (a)   For each parade made by a circus, the sum of $50.
         (b)   For each parade made by any other show, the sum of $5.
      (2)   Such taxes shall be paid before such respective parades are made,
and the Chief of Police is instructed and authorized to prevent such parades
until such taxes are paid. The provisions of this division (D) shall not apply
to parades of circuses where every vehicle used is motorized and equipped with
rubber tires.
   (E)   Violation of section. The proprietor, manager or any other person of
any of such shows violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('68 Code, § 23-1)
Penalty, see § 111.99
DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
§ 111.30 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or conduct any public
dance within the limits of the city unless a permit shall have been first
obtained for such public dance or the dance hall where same may be held for
such purposes.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dance at any public dance or
dance hall except a public dance or dance hall for which a permit has been
issued under this subchapter. This division (B) shall not apply to any
entertainer performing any sort of entertainment at a public gathering.
('68 Code, § 23-32)
§ 111.31 APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring a permit to operate a dance hall shall file with the
Chief of Police a sworn written application for such permit, which application
shall state:
   (A)   The location of the place, room or floor and the size thereof which is
proposed to be used for such purpose.
   (B)   The name and address of the applicant and the length of his residence
at such place.
   (C)   Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor, and if so, the nature of the offense.
   (D)   If the applicant is a firm, partnership or corporation, the
information required in divisions (A), (B) and (C) of this section shall be
given with reference of each member thereof and with reference to the operator
or person in charge of the dance hall.
   (E)   The previous occupation of the applicant for a period of five years
next preceding the filing of the application.
('68 Code, § 23-33)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.32 APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF APPLICATION BY CHIEF OF POLICE.
   No permit required by this subchapter shall be issued unless the application
therefor has been approved by the Chief of Police. In the event the Chief of
Police shall refuse to approve such applications the applicant shall have the
right to appeal, within ten days after such refusal, in writing to the City
Council requesting a hearing by the Council upon the application, and the
Council shall hear same within 30 days thereafter to determine the correctness
of the action of the Chief of Police on such application, and whatever action
shall be taken by the Council on such appeal shall be final.
('68 Code, § 23-34)
§ 111.33 ISSUANCE.
   A permit required by this subchapter shall be issued by the Assessor and
Collector of Taxes when the conditions of this subchapter have been complied
with and when the application has been approved by the Chief of Police or the
City Council in accord with §
111.32.
('68 Code, § 23-36)
§ 111.34 NOT TO ISSUE FOR TAXI DANCE HALL.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as authorizing the issuance of
a permit under any circumstances for the conduct of any dance hall commonly
known as “taxi dance hall,” wherein there are kept and provided female dancing
partners for male guests who pay for the privilege of dancing with such female
partners, and no permit shall be issued for such a dance hall.
('68 Code, § 23-37)
§ 111.35 CONTENTS.
   A permit provided for in this subchapter shall state on its face to whom it
is issued, the date it will expire, the address and location of such dance hall
or place where the dance will be held, and whether the permit is issued for a
dance hall or a public dance. It shall be signed and sealed by the Assessor and
Collector of Taxes.
('68 Code, § 23-38)
§ 111.36 POSTING.
   A permit issued under this subchapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place
at or near the entrance of the dance hall or place where the dance is being
held in such a place and position that it may be easily read at any time of day
or night.
('68 Code, § 23-39)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.37 TERM OF DANCE HALL PERMIT; NO REFUND OF FEE.
   No permit shall be issued under this subchapter to any dance hall for any
term less than one year, and there shall be no refund of any permit fee paid
hereunder for any cause whatsoever.
('68 Code, § 23-40)
§ 111.38 NOT ASSIGNABLE; TRANSFER TO NEW LOCATION.
   Permits issued under this subchapter shall be deemed personal to the person
to whom issued and shall not be assignable, provided the owner may move his
permit from one location to another after the Chief of Police shall have been
given five days' notice and shall have approved of such change.
('68 Code, § 23-41)
§ 111.39 DOES NOT GRANT VESTED RIGHTS.
   The granting of any permit under this subchapter shall in no event be
construed as the granting or conferring of any vested right.
('68 Code, § 23-42)
§ 111.40 REVOCATION OR CANCELLATION.
   (A)   By City Council. A permit issued under this subchapter shall be
subject to revocation and cancellation upon proof being submitted to the City
Council that violations of this subchapter or any applicable ordinance of the
city or any laws of the state are being committed at the place licensed.
   (B)   By Chief of Police. If any one holding a permit under this subchapter
shall violate any of the terms of this subchapter or any other ordinance of the
city or law of the state, the Chief of Police may cancel such permit by giving
written notice thereof to the owner or operator of the dance hall for which the
permit is issued. Such action shall be final unless an appeal therefrom in
writing is filed with the City Council within ten days, and after such appeal
is filed the City Council shall conduct a hearing on such cancellation and may
cancel such permit for any of the causes shown, which action shall be final.
('68 Code, § 23-43)
POOL HALLS, RECREATION OR FAMILY CENTERS AND BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS WITH
RECREATION AND AMUSEMENT MACHINES
Part 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMUSEMENT CENTER. Any business establishment in which at least 25% of the
public floor area is devoted to coin-operated machines used for recreation and
amusement purposes, or pool or billiard tables.
   COIN-OPERATED MACHINE USED FOR RECREATION OR AMUSEMENT PURPOSES. Every
machine or device of any kind or character which is operated by or with coins
or metal slugs, tokens, or checks and which dispenses or is used or is capable
of being used or operated for amusement, pleasure, skill or recreation. This
term expressly includes pinball, football, coin-operated pool tables, and other
coin-operated machines which dispense or afford skill or pleasure. This term
expressly excludes coin-operated music machines, pay toilets, pay telephones,
coin-operated rides for children, and all other coin-operated machines which
dispense or vend merchandise, commodities, confections or music.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, company, association or corporation owning any
coin-operated machine used for recreation, or pool or billiard tables from
which he derived a profit, save and except religious, charitable and
educational organizations authorized under the laws of the state.
   POOL or BILLIARD TABLE. Any table surrounded by a ledge or cushion, with or
without pockets, upon which balls are propelled by a stick or cue, and where
the player thereon does not or is not required to make a coin deposit causing
an electrical connection of any nature or kind before such game may be actually
commenced.
   RECREATION or AMUSEMENT MACHINES. Any pool or billiard table or any coin
operated machine used for amusement purposes, any of which table or machine is
operated for profit.
('68 Code, § 23-54) (Ord. passed 11-10-64; Am. Ord. 11-1975-37, passed 11-11-
75; Am. Ord. 2-1977-4, passed 2-8-77; Am. Ord. 4-1977-9, passed 4-12-77; Am.
Ord. 10-1979-53, passed 10-9-79; Am. Ord. 3-1982-10, passed 3-9-82)
§ 111.51 OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   There is levied an annual occupation tax equal to one-half of the
amount levied by the state on coin-operated machines used for recreation or
amusement purposes, or pool or billiard tables. The occupation tax shall be
levied upon the owner of such coin-operated machines, or pool or billiard
tables, save and except religious charitable and educational organizations
authorized under the laws of the state; and the tax levied herein shall be paid
to the Tax Collector of the city, who shall issue an occupation tax receipt
and, for each machine on which the occupation tax is paid, an occupation tax
tag. The occupation tax shall be due add payable on January 1 of each year.
Such occupation tax receipt and tax tag shall specify the year for which the
tax receipt and tax tag are valid. Such occupation tax receipt shall specify
the number of recreation or amusement machines, pool or billiard tables for
which it is issued and the address of the legal owner. The occupation tax shall
be affixed to each machine, pool or billiard table on which the occupation tax
is paid.
   (B)   In the event the owner of any of the recreation or amusement machines
wishes to substitute a different machine for one within the city on which the
occupation tax has been paid, the owner will remove the tax tag from the
machine to be replaced and place it upon the substitute machine. Provided,
however, that the machine that is replaced by the substitute machine shall not
be operated for profit within the city again until an occupation tax tag is
affixed to it. In the event the tax tag is mutilated, the owner will turn in
the mutilated occupation tax tag to the tax collector's office and receive a
new tag. There shall be a $.25 charge for the new tag.
('68 Code, § 23-55) (Ord. passed 11-10-64; Am. Ord. 2-1977-4, passed 2-8-77;
Am. Ord. 4-1977-9, passed 4-12-77; Am. Ord. 10-1979-53, passed 10-9-79)
§ 111.52 LOCATION OF RECREATION OR AMUSEMENT MACHINES.
   (A)   The recreation or amusement machines which are operated for profit
within a place of business shall not be left unattended.
   (B)   Within each place of business in which recreation or amusement
machines are operated for a profit, the machines will be so situated so that
the said machines will be in full, open, public view.
   (C) The term FULL, OPEN, PUBLIC VIEW, as used in this subchapter shall mean
that the machines are clearly and plainly visible from the exterior of the
front of the building. The front of a building, as used here, is that side of
the structure where the main entrance is located or that side of a structure
which fronts a street. Provided, however, if the playing of the recreation or
amusement machines is in a recreation center where the majority of the public
is engaged in an activity other than the playing of the machines, the machines
shall be in full, open, public view if the recreation and amusement machines
are clearly and plainly visible from the areas of the building where the other
activities are being performed.
('68 Code, § 23-56) (Ord. passed 11-10-64; Am. Ord. 2-1977-4, passed 2-8-77;
Am. Ord. 4-1977-9, passed 4-12-77; Am. Ord. 3-1982-10, passed 3-9-82)
§ 111.53 PARTITIONS; SANITARY FACILITIES.
   It shall be unlawful to erect or construct in any business establishment in
which recreation and amusement machines are operated for a profit, any
partition obstructing the full, open, public view of any part of premises in
which recreation or amusement machines are displayed and operated for profit;
provided, however, that toilets or other sanitary facilities shall be enclosed
and adequately ventilated in accordance with the health, plumbing, sanitary,
and other applicable regulations of the city.
('68 Code, § 23-57) (Ord. passed 11-10-64; Am. Ord. 2-1977-4, passed 2-8-77;
Am. Ord. 4-1977-9, passed 4-12-77)
§ 111.54 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No person may engage in the operation for profit of any recreation or
amusement machines within the city between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00
a.m., Monday through Thursday, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.
on Friday and Saturday. Such recreation or amusement machines may be operated
on Sundays only between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m.
('68 Code, § 23-58) (Ord. passed 11-10-64; Am. Ord. 11-1975-37, passed 11-11-
75; Am. Ord. 2-1977-4, passed 2-8-77; Am. Ord. 4-1977-9, passed 4-12-77; Am.
Ord. 4-1985-28, passed 4-18-85)
§ 111.55 MINOR'S PRESENCE RESTRICTED.
   No person who has the control of any business establishment wherein is kept,
used or operated for profit any recreation or amusement machines shall permit
or allow any minor under the age of 18 years to play thereon or to operate any
such machine during school hours. It shall be the duty of any person who is the
proprietor or keeper of such a business establishment to post conspicuously in
his place of business in the vicinity of the machine's location within the
place of business the following sign: “Minors Under the Age of 18 Years Not
Allowed Here During School Hours.”
('68 Code, § 23-59) (Ord. passed 11-10-64; Am. Ord. 2-1977-4, passed 2-8-77;
Am. Ord. 4-1977-9, passed 4-12-77)
§ 111.56 PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO PAY OCCUPATION TAX.
   The Police Department is authorized to seal any recreation or amusement
machine, or pool or billiard table on which the occupation tax has not been
paid. The Police Department is authorized to charge a fee of $10 for the
release of any recreation or amusement machine, or pool or billiard table that
is sealed as provided above for nonpayment of the occupation tax. Whoever shall
break the seal affixed in the name of the city or display or remove from the
location any recreation or amusement machine, or pool or billiard table shall
be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor under the laws of the state.
('68 Code, § 23-60) (Ord. 4-1977-9, passed 4-12-77; Am. Ord. 10-1979-53, passed
10-9-79)
§ 111.57 INSPECTIONS.
   The City Manager shall appoint or designate his authorized representative to
make periodic inspections of premises licensed under this subchapter to
determine compliance with the building provisions, the maintenance of toilets
and other sanitary facilities and compliance with the health, plumbing,
sanitary and other applicable code provisions and any other ordinance of the
city.
('68 Code, § 23-61) (Ord. passed 11-10-64)
Part 2: LICENSE
§ 111.65 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or business entity that owns an
amusement center, save and except religious, charitable or educational
organizations authorized under the laws of the state to operate such business
within the city without first having obtained an appropriate license from the
Tax Collector. Application for license shall be made with the Tax Collector
initially and on or before January 1 of each succeeding year. Whoever shall
violate this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor under this code.
('68 Code, § 23-71) (Ord. passed 11-10-64; Am. Ord. 2-1977-4, passed 2-8-77;
Am. Ord. 4-1977-9, passed 4-12-77; Am. Ord. 10-1979-53, passed 10-9-79)
§ 111.66 FEE.
   There is levied an annual license fee on each person or business entity that
owns an amusement center within the city. The Tax Collector is authorized to
collect this annual license fee, which shall be due and payable on January 1 of
each year. The annual license fee for such a general business shall be as
follows:
 
Number of Machines Pool or Billiard Tables Fee
50 or fewer                                $ 100
51-200                                     200
Over 200                                   250
 
('68 Code, § 23-72) (Ord. passed 11-10-64; Am. Ord. 2-1977-4, passed 2-8-77;
Am. Ord. 4-1977-9, passed 4-12-77; Am. Ord. 10-1979-53, passed 10-9-79)
§ 111.67 SALE OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.
   The sale of alcoholic beverages in or on the premises licensed under this
subchapter is prohibited. No person so licensed shall knowingly permit the
sale, use or consumption of any kind of alcoholic beverages in or upon the
premises for which a license has been issued.
('68 Code, § 23-73) (Ord. 4-1977-9, passed 4-12-77)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.68 TERM; NONTRANSFERABLE.
   Any license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be for one year and
shall be nontransferable.
('68 Code, § 23-74) (Ord. passed 11-10-64)
§ 111.69 DISPLAY.
   A license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall at all times be displayed
in some conspicuous place within the licensed place of business.
('68 Code, § 23-75) (Ord. passed 11-10-64)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.70 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The City Council is authorized and empowered to revoke the license of
any person licensed under this subchapter, after giving such licensee ten days'
notice of a hearing and after conducting such hearing for the purpose of
determining whether such license should be revoked.
   (B)   The power of revocation shall be exercised upon the following grounds
only:
      (1)   For the violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   For knowingly permitting the sale, use or consumption of any
alcoholic beverages in or upon the licensed premises.
      (3)   For violation of the prescribed hours of operation provided in this
subchapter.
      (4)   For knowingly permitting the presence on the premises of a person
under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
      (5)   For knowingly permitting disorderly conduct or immoral practices on
the premises.
      (6)   For knowingly permitting the violation of the laws of the state or
of this code of ordinances or any other ordinance of the city.
      (7)   For failure to provide a minimum lighting of 30 footcandles at
every point 30 inches above the floor in the parlor.
('68 Code, § 23-76) (Ord. passed 11-10-64)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty set forth in §
10.99
CHAPTER 112: MULTI-CHANNEL SERVICES PROVIDERS
Section
General Provisions
   
112.001   Title
   
112.002   Construction; governing law; venue
   
112.003   Scope
   
112.004   Statement of intent
   
112.005   Definitions
   
112.006   Administration; delegation of powers and authority
   
112.007   Applicability to an MCS provider
   
112.008   Exemption for certain MCS provider
   
112.009   Non-exempt MCS providers seeking relief from this chapter
   
112.010   Failure of the council/franchising authority to enforce this chapter
   
112.011   MCS providers or their assignees subject to present and future
ordinances
   
112.012   Inconsistencies with federal or state rules, regulations or laws
   
112.013   Conflicts with an existing franchise agreement
   
112.014   Retained rights and authorities
   
112.015   MCS provider may promulgate rules
   
112.016   Notices
   
112.017   Indemnity
   
112.018   Liability insurance
   
112.019   Performance and construction/completion bond
   
112.020   Reports and records; policy
   
112.021   Furnishing of reports
   
112.022   Books and records
   
112.023   Continued use of individual antennas protected
   
112.024   Alerting subscribers in the event of an emergency; standby power
   
112.025   Safety alert technology
   
112.026   Providing broad categories of video programming; objectives
   
112.027   Providing seamless or “see-through” technology; objectives
   
112.028   Tampering; unauthorized reception of certain services
Notification of Services; Billing
   
112.045   Notification of rights and responsibilities; policy
   
112.046   Notice of rights and responsibilities; providing multi-channel
service; minimum contents
   
112.047   Billing practices
   
112.048   Billing credit for service outages; interruptions; substandard signal
or picture quality; unsolicited service
   
112.049   Prohibition against negative option promotional package
   
112.050   Sales solicitations; special rules
   
112.051   Menu-driven systems, service clusters, and packaging of service
tiers; special rules
   
112.052   Disconnection for non-payment
   
112.053   Voluntary customer changes
Customer Service; Equipment
   
112.070   Customer service hours; capabilities of customer service office;
telephone
   
112.071   Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited
   
112.072   Use and return of equipment; security deposits and their return
   
112.073   Service inquiry logs
   
112.074   Restoration of a subscriber's property
   
112.075   Service inquiries, requests, complaints, and response times
   
112.076   Repair parts and repair personnel
   
112.077   New installations and connections; regular, promotional, seasonal,
short-term, pay-per-view, and menu-driven; re-connections
   
112.078   Protection of subscriber privacy
   
112.079   Resolution of complaints/inquiries
   
112.080   Continuity of multi-channel service provisions; policy
Construction; Installation; Maintenance
   
112.095   Construction schedule and related requirements
   
112.096   Construction of good quality
   
112.097   Streets and public ways; conditions on use
   
112.098   Duty to remove franchised properties from the public streets
   
112.099   Construction standards
   
112.100   System construction schedule for franchised MCS providers
   
112.101   System expansion for MCS providers
   
112.102   Permits and licenses
   
112.103   Safety requirements; policy
   
112.104   Preventive maintenance program
   
112.105   Fire and safety codes
   
112.106   Alternative user charge
Franchises
   
112.120   Franchise required; exception
   
112.121   Authority to grant non-exclusive franchises
   
112.122   Franchise agreement; minimal requirements
   
112.123   Extent of grant of franchise
   
112.124   Term of franchise
   
112.125   Application for franchise; application fee
   
112.126   Franchise fees
   
112.127   Assignment or transfer of franchise
   
112.128   Default of franchise; revocation, termination or cancellation of
franchise
   
112.129   Performance evaluations
Cable Operators
   
112.145   Regulatory provisions for cable operators
   
112.146   MCS providers classified as cable operators; additional rules
   
112.147   MCS providers classified as cable operators; specific additional
public, educational, and governmental rules
 
   
112.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Franchise holder charging excessive rates, see §
130.06
   Franchises and special privileges, see Charter §
10.3
Editor's note:
   City franchise agreements and the exemptions therein have not been included
in the codification of this chapter; however, relevant ordinances concerning
these franchise agreements shall remain on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.001 TITLE.
   This chapter may be known and cited as the Multi-Channel Service Providers
Regulatory Ordinance for the City of Cleburne, Texas.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.002 CONSTRUCTION; GOVERNING LAW; VENUE.
   This chapter shall be construed under and in accordance with the laws of the
State of Texas and the City Charter and City Code to the extent that such
Charter and Codes are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution
and laws of the United States or the State of Texas. All obligations of the
parties hereunder are performable in Johnson County, Texas. In the event that
any proceeding is brought to enforce the terms of this chapter, the same shall
be brought in Johnson County.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.003 SCOPE.
   This chapter shall be effective within the geographical limits of the city,
including any areas subsequently annexed by the city.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.004 STATEMENT OF INTENT.
   (A)   The Council recognizes the United States Congress' intent in approving
the Cable Acts of 1984 and 1992, being 47 USC 521 et seq. As such, the Council
reaffirms and adopts those principles and ideals as part of the city's intent
with respect to cable television and expands its intent (where applicable) to
cover all MCS providers.
   (B)   As expressed by Congress, and adopted by the Council, its intent is as
follows:
      (1)   Establish a local policy concerning communications and
technologies;
      (2)   Establish franchise procedures and standards which encourage the
growth and development of cable systems which assure that cable systems are
responsive to the needs and interests of the city;
      (3)   Establish guidelines for the exercise of local authority with
respect to the regulation of cable systems;
      (4)   Assure that cable communications provide, and are encouraged to
provide, the widest diversity of information and services to the public;
      (5)   Establish an orderly process for franchise renewal which protects
cable operators against unfair denials of renewal where an operator's past
performance and proposal for future performance meet the standards set by the
Cable Acts of 1984 and 1992, an applicable franchise, and this chapter;
      (6)   Promote competition in cable communications and minimize
unnecessary regulations that would impose an undue economic burden on cable
systems; and
      (7)   Regulate rates charged by Multi-Channel Service Providers for the
basic service tier if the Multi-Channel Service Provider is not subject to
effective competition.
   (C)   In addition to principles and ideals listed in subsection (B), the
Council also expresses that its intent covers the following:
      (1)   To create a set of regulations, standards, and procedures for MCS
providers;
      (2)   To create a comprehensive customer service and consumer protection
policy for MCS providers;
      (3)   To provide for access and inspection of an MCS provider's books and
records in order to monitor compliance of local, state, and federal laws, and
any franchise agreement (if one has been granted);
      (4)   To create a thorough construction and installation policy for an
MCS provider's system;
      (5)   To provide for health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the
city in light of the MCS provider's construction, operation, and maintenance;
      (6)   To provide for emergency override capability, so that citizens of
the city may be warned of a potential, imminent, actual disaster or emergency
situation that exists in the area;
      (7)   To provide for the introduction and installation of safety alert
technology in order to notify both subscribers and non-subscribers of imminent
disaster emergencies;
      (8)   To create a thorough procedure for collecting and monitoring
franchise fees and alternative user charges;
      (9)   To create a viable alternative to franchise fees in case such fees,
or their collection, are ruled invalid, unenforceable, or unconstitutional;
      (10)    To create a thorough default and revocation procedure for
licensed and franchised MCS providers;
      (11)    To provide for continuity of services in the event of city
acquisition, abandonment, withdrawal, cessation of service, revocation,
termination, non-renewal, or expiration of an MCS provider;
      (12)    To create a performance review procedure in order to assist the
city in its periodic evaluation of a franchised MCS provider's performance; and
      (13)    To create procedures for the evaluation and grant of MCS provider
applications for authorization, the identification of multi-channel service
related to community needs, and the establishment and enforcement of rules and
regulations of MCS providers consistent with the identified needs of the
community.
   (D)   Further, the Council recognizes that with respect to cable operators,
the Council's power to adopt regulations is, in part, authorized under the
Cable Acts of 1984 and 1992, as well as the Council's police powers, due to the
potential for physical scarcity and public disruption when cable either
occupies or uses the public rights-of-way.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A/B SWITCH or INPUT SELECTOR SWITCH. Any device that enables a viewer to
select between any video source (including any type a multi-channel service) or
any ancillary equipment. Such a device may be more sophisticated than a mere
two-sided switch, may utilize other multi-channel system interface equipment,
and may be built into television receivers.
   ABANDONED CALLS. Telephone calls that are connected to an MCS provider's
general infor-mation number, but the caller hangs up without being attended by
a representative of the MCS provider, or by a device capable of problem
resolution.
   ACCESS CHANNEL. A government, education, or public channel which is carried
on a multi-channel system, but which is not part of any institutional network.
   ACTIVATED CHANNEL. Has the same meaning as defined by federal or state law
if such a definition is permitted.
   AFFILIATED PROGRAMMER. A programmer with an ownership interest of 5% or more
including general partnership interests, direct ownership interests, and stock
interests in a corporation where such stockholders are officers or directors or
which directly or indirectly own 5% or more of the outstanding stock, whether
voting or non-voting. Such interests include limited partnership interests of
5% or greater.
   ALTERNATIVE USER CHARGE. A charge used in place of a franchise fee that the
Council requires as payment for the privilege of using the streets, easements,
public ways, or rights-of-way of the city in order to construct, maintain, and
operate a multi-channel system. An alternative user fee is not based on an MCS
provider's gross annual revenues (as is the case in a franchise fee), but
rather is based on the value of the city property that an MCS provider is using
to construct, maintain, and operate its multi-channel system.
   ANNUAL GROSS REVENUES. Any and all compensation which is derived from the
operation of the MCS system, and which is attributable to the subscribers or
customers within the city. Further, annual gross revenues, any and all
compensation, in whatever form (except as exempted by this definition),
exchange or otherwise derived from all multi-channel services, MCS operations,
and MCS related activities within the city including, but not limited to,
revenues from subscriber rates, bulk billing rates, menu-driven cable, pay-per-
view events or channels, premium channels, service tiers, service clusters,
institutional networks, advertising, installations, rebates or commission
received from travel or home shopping services, infomercial channels, or
commercial access. Also, unless prohibited or preempted by either federal or
state law, annual gross revenues shall mean any and all compensation from all
ancillary multi-channel services, MCS operation, and MCS related activities
within the city, including, but not limited to sale of MCS or MCS equipment,
revenues from advertising stuffers inserted into periodic billing statements or
other notices, revenues from 900 numbers or revenues from other interactive
cable or informational services, revenues from personal communications networks
(PCNs), rental or sale of video discs, rental or sale of video cassettes,
rental or sale of descrambling converters, or other devices, rental or sale of
remote control devices (including those with volume control), rental or sale of
a/b or input switches, rental or sale of interactive games or software, rental
or sale of digital radio equipment, sale of satellite antenna-received
programming for a programmer or distributor of services, or from revenues
received as the billing agent, collector, or retailer of satellite antenna-
received service. However, annual gross revenues does not mean any taxes
imposed and/or assessed by law on subscribers (including state sales taxes, but
excluding any state or local franchise fees) which an MCS provider is obligated
to collect and pay in full to the applicable authorities.
   APPLICANT. A person submitting an application or proposal to the city for a
license or franchise to operate a multi-channel system under the terms and
conditions set forth in this chapter, and any State regulations.
   APPLICATION or PROPOSAL. Synonymous for the purposes of this chapter, means
the process by which the applicant submits a request and indicates a desire to
be granted a license or franchise for all or a part of the city. An application
or proposal includes all written documentation, and verbal statements and
representations, in whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the
Council/franchising authority concerning the construction, rendering of
services, maintenance, or any other matter pertaining to the proposed multi-
channel system.
   ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER OF A FRANCHISED MCS PROVIDER'S FRANCHISE. Any
transaction or action which effectively or actually changes operational or
managerial control from one person or entity to another.
   AUXILIARY EQUIPMENT. Equipment supplied by the MCS provider (such as a
converter, remote control unit, or input selector switch), which enhances or
assists in the reception or provision of multi-channel service.
   BASIC SERVICE TIER. Shall, at a minimum, include all signals of domestic
television broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal
secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of
such station, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable
system), any public, educational, and governmental programming required by the
franchise to be carried on the basic tier, and any additional video programming
signals or service added to the basic tier by the cable operator.
   CABLE ACT OF 1984 (CCPA). The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, being
47 USC 521 et seq., as amended.
   CABLE ACT OF 1992. The Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992, being 47 USC 521 et seq., as amended.
   CABLE CHANNEL or CABLE TELEVISION CHANNEL. A portion of the electromagnetic
or light frequency spectrum which is capable of delivering a television channel
(as television channel is defined by the FCC).
   CABLE OPERATOR or OPERATOR. Any person or group of persons who:
      (1)   Provides cable television service over a cable system and directly
or through one (1) or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable
system; or
      (2)   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement,
the management and operation of such a cable system.
   CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICE. Includes any video programming provided over a
cable system, regardless of service tier, including installation or rental of
equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other than:
      (1)   Video programming carried on the basic service tier as defined in
this section;
      (2)   Video programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay-per-program
basis; or
      (3)   A combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or pay-per-
program video programming offered on a multiplexed or time-shifted basis so
long as the combined service:
         (a)   Consists of commonly-identified video programming; and
         (b)   Is not bundled with any regulated tier of service.
   CABLE SYSTEM or CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM. A facility consisting of a set of
closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and
control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes
video, voice or data programming, and which is provided to multiple subscribers
within the city. However, such terms do not include the following:
      (1)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one (1) or more broadcast stations; or
      (2)   A facility that serves only subscribes in one (1) or more multiple
unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management unless such
facility or facilities uses any public rights-of-way; or
      (3)   A facility or a common carrier which is subject, in whole, or in
part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except
that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes
of Section 621(c) of the CCPA, codified at 47 USC 541) to the extent such
facility is used in the transmission of video, voice, or data programming or
service directly to subscribers; or
      (4)   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility.
   CHARGE. A one-time or non-regularly occurring cost paid by the subscriber,
and which is associated with the installation, maintenance, service, or repair
of the multi-channel service. Specifically, a charge includes, but is not
limited to, disconnection fees, downgrade charges, costs for closed-captioned
devices and equipment, remote control devices and equipment for hearing-
impaired customers, installation charges for video camera recorders and
players, installation charges for digital radio, and trip or service call
charges.
   CITY. The City of Cleburne, Texas or its lawful successor.
   COLLECTION CHARGE. A charge or fee imposed on a customer by an MCS provider
for such provider's efforts at collecting, or attempting to collect, a past due
account.
   COMMERCIALLY IMPRACTICABLE. With respect to any requirement applicable to an
MCS provider, means that it is commercially impracticable for such an MCS
provider to comply with such requirement as a result of a change in conditions
which is beyond the control of such an MCS provider, and the non-occurrence of
which was the basic assumption on which the requirement was based.
   CONVERTER. Any electric, electronic, or other device, separate and apart
from the subscriber's receiver that is capable of converting or changing
signals to a frequency not intended to be susceptible to interference within
the television, video, or data receiver of a subscriber, and by an appropriate
channel or other type of selector may also permit a subscriber to view or
otherwise use signals delivered at designated dial locations, or such other
reception and use allocations as may be applicable and required for the
practical use of the signal.
   COUNCIL or COUNCIL/FRANCHISING AUTHORITY. The City Council for the City of
Cleburne, Texas or its lawful successor, which is the lawful legislative body
for the city.
   CUSTOMER. A subscriber, or user of the services and/or facilities of the
multi-channel system provided by an MCS provider.
   DATA CHANNEL or INFORMATION CHANNEL. The use of the electromagnetic or light
spectrum for the purpose of transporting data or non video programming.
   DECODER or DESCRAMBLER. A device which enables a subscriber to convert a
scrambled signal into a viewable or otherwise usable signal.
   DISASTER EMERGENCY or DISASTER or EMERGENCY. An imminent, impending, or
actual natural or humanly induced situation wherein the health, safety, or
welfare of the residents of the city is threatened. A disaster emergency (by
illustration) may include a sudden or expected insect infestation (such as with
locusts or bees), snowstorm, flood, hail storm, tornado, severe thunderstorm,
hazardous waste infiltration, fire, petroleum, munitions, nuclear explosion, or
aircraft crash.
   DROP. A small branch of cable or other transmitting medium which connects
the terminals on the back of the subscriber's receiver to the feeder cable or
future technical equivalent on the street, easement, rights-of-way, or public
way.
   EASEMENT. Means and shall include any public easement or other compatible
use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for public utility
purposes or any other purpose whatsoever, including cable television, or any
multi-channel service. EASEMENT shall include a private easement used for the
provision of cable service or any other multi-channel service.
   FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (FCC). The Federal administrative agency,
or lawful successor, authorized to oversee cable television and other multi-
channel regulation on a national level.
   FIBER CABLE or FIBER OPTIC CABLE. Very thin and pliable cylinders, or
strands of glass or plastic, or any future developed technical equivalent, used
to carry wide bands of multiple frequencies.
   FRANCHISE. The initial authorization, or subsequent renewal granted by the
Council/franchising authority in order for a person to construct, operate, and
maintain a franchised MCS system in all or part of the city.
   FRANCHISE EXPIRATION. The date of expiration or the end of the term of a
franchised MCS provider, as provided under a franchise agreement.
   FRANCHISE FEE. A fee or charge that the city requires as payment for the
privilege of using the streets, rights-of-way, public ways, and easements of
the city in order to construct, maintain, and operate a franchised MCS system.
   FRANCHISED MCS PROVIDER. A person that is awarded by the Council/franchising
authority a franchise to construct and operate a franchised multi-channel
system, within all or part of the city. The term FRANCHISED MCS PROVIDER
specifically includes the term CABLE OPERATOR.
   FRANCHISING AUTHORITY or COUNCIL/FRANCHISING AUTHORITY. The City Council for
the City of Cleburne, Texas. This definition specifically includes the
situation wherein the Council in its franchising authority capacity grants a
franchise, or renews a franchise, or approves a franchise transfer by an
applicant for an MCS franchise, or a franchised MCS provider.
   HEADEND. The electronic control center where incoming signals, including
those of television broadcast stations, are amplified, modulated, filtered,
converted, or in any way processed or converted for redistribution to
subscribers.
   HUB. The satellite or remote receiving, processing and/or transmitting
facility, enabling the signal to be extended beyond the physical/electronic
capabilities of the multi-channel electronics and/or to serve as a remote
switching facility.
   LATE CHARGE. A charge which is added to a subscriber's account or bill for
non-payment of a previously due and delinquent account.
   MAYOR. The Mayor for the City of Cleburne, Texas.
   MCS. Multi-channel service.
   MCS PROVIDER or MULTI-CHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDER. Any person or group of
persons who provides multi-channel communications service over a multi-channel
system and directly or indirectly owns a significant interest in such multi-
channel system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible through any
arrangement, the management and operation of such a multi-channel system. The
term MCS PROVIDER or MULTI-CHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDER specifically includes the
terms cable operator, MDS provider or multi-point distribution system provider,
MMDS provider, personal communications network system provider (where
applicable), and SMATV operator.
   MDS. Multi-point distribution system.
   MDS PROVIDER or MULTI-POINT DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM PROVIDER. Any person or
group of persons who is authorized by the FCC, within frequency boundaries
established by the FCC, to transmit specialized multi-channel programming or
data or facsimile transmission to subscriber-selected locations.
   MENU-DRIVEN or MENU-DRIVEN CABLE or MENU-DRIVEN PROGRAM/SERVICE. The process
whereby the MCS provider offers multi-channel services via the multi-channel
system in a format that allows the subscriber to select and be charged for
multi-channel services on either a per channel, per program, or per event
basis. Menu-driven cable allows the subscriber to create his or her own service
tier(s) or cluster(s), and the opportunity to change the composition of his or
her tier(s) or cluster(s) on a periodic basis.
   MULTI-CHANNEL PROGRAMMING SERVICE or MULTI-CHANNEL SERVICE. Means:
      (1)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or
other programming service; and
      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection
of such video programming or other programming service.
   MULTI-CHANNEL SYSTEM. Means:
      (1)   Facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and
associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment; or
      (2)   A facility consisting of infra-red transmission or point-to-point
transmission (as permitted by law); or
      (3)   Any functional equivalent that is designed to provide multi-channel
service which includes video voice or data programming and which is provided to
multiple subscribers within the city.
      However, such term does not include the following:
      (1)   A facility that only retransmits the television signals of one or
more broadcast stations;
      (2)   A facility that serves only subscribers and one or more multi-unit
dwellings under com-mon ownership, control, or management unless such facility
or facilities uses any public rights-of-way,
      (3)   A facility or common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part,
to the provision of Title II of the Communication Act of 1934 except that such
facility shall be considered a multi-channel system (other than for purposes of
Section 621(c) of the CCPA, codified at 47 USC 541) to the extent such facility
is used in the transmission of video, voice, or data programming or service
directly to subscriber; or
      (4)   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility.
   ORDINANCE. The Multi-Channel Service Providers Regulatory Ordinance for the
City of Cleburne, Texas.
     OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE. Information that an MCS provider (specifically
including a cable operator) makes available to all subscribers generally.
   PAY-PER-VIEW or PREMIUM CHANNEL. The delivery over the multi-channel system
of audio and/or video signals in an unintelligible form to subscribers for a
fee or charge (over and above the charge for standard or basic service) on a
per program or per channel basis where the unintelligible or unusable form for
viewing is made intelligible only to subscribers paying a separate fee or
charge for the viewing or use of the signals.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, business, trust, estate, trust,
partnership, association of two or more persons having a joint common interest,
governmental agency, or other legal entity, including the city.
   PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK (PCN) or  PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM. Any
ancillary or aligned component of an MCS provider's system consisting of
communications lines, cables, equipment or facilities which are used to provide
telecommunications service that in any manner uses or occupies the streets,
easements, public ways, or rights-of-way within the city (as annexed). However,
PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK does not include any part of a state or FCC
licensed local government local exchange telephone company, or any part of a
federal, state, county, or local government owned telecommunications system.
   PROPOSED ABANDONMENT, WITHDRAWAL, OR CESSATION OF MULTI-CHANNEL SERVICE. The
anticipated, contemplated, imminent, or expected (either voluntary or
involuntary) disruption, discontinuance, desertion, or removal of an MCS
provider's operation and provision of multi-channel service from all or part of
the city.
   PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS FACILITIES. Means:
      (1)   Channel capacity designated exclusively for public, educational or
governmental use; and
      (2)   Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.
   RATE. The periodic price paid for the receipt of any multi-channel service
provided by an MCS provider.
   REVOCATION, TERMINATION, OR NON-RENEWAL. An official act by the city whereby
the Council/franchising authority removes, repeals, or rescinds previously
approved authorization for a licensed or franchised MCS provider to conduct the
running of a multi-channel system within the city.
   SMALL SYSTEM. A cable television system that serves fewer than 1,000
subscribers. The service area of a small system is determined by the number of
subscribers that are served by a system's principal headend, including any
other headends or microwave sites that are technically integrated to the
system's principal headend.
   SERVICE CLUSTER. The grouping, aligning, or packaging of one or more multi-
channel programming services by category (such as sports and/or news), or by
rate, or by some other identifiable method, and charging a separate price or
rate for each service cluster.
   SERVICE OUTAGE FOR PURPOSES OF CREDIT. The loss of picture or sound on all
basic subscriber channels, or one or more auxiliary programming channels
(including tiers and clusters). For purposes of response to a service call, a
service outage means a loss of a picture or sound or other informational
service provided by an MCS provider. Both of these situations assumes the
outage is not caused by the failure or malfunction of a subscriber's television
receiver or by the error, misfeasance or malfeasance of the subscriber.
   SERVICE TIER. A category of multi-channel service or other programming
service provided by an MCS provider and for which a separate rate is charged by
an MCS provider.
   SMATV. Satellite Master Antenna Television.
   SMATV OPERATOR or SATELLITE MASTER ANTENNA TELEVISION OPERATOR. Any person
or group of persons who:
      (1)   Provides multi-channel service over an SMATV system; or
      (2)   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement,
the management of an SMATV system.
   SMATV SYSTEM. A private multi-channel system not crossing any public rights-
of-way and which is located on private property, and serving private dwellings.
   STATE. The State of Texas.
   STREET or PUBLIC WAY. The surface of and the space above and below a public
street, road, highway, freeway, land, path, public way or place, alley, court,
boulevard, parkway, drive, or other easement now or hereafter held by the city
(including any street, as defined, which is acquired by eminent domain) for the
purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rights-of-way now
or hereafter held by the city (including any easements or rights-of-way
acquired by eminent domain) which shall, with their proper use and meaning,
entitle the city and MCS provider to use thereof for the purpose of installing
or transmitting multi-channel system transmissions over poles , wires, cable,
conductors, ducts, conduits, viaducts, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
attachments, and other property as may ordinarily be necessary and pertinent to
a multi-channel system.
   SUBSCRIBER. A person lawfully receiving multi-channel service delivered by
the MCS provider.
   USC. United States Code.
   USER. A person or organization utilizing a multi-channel system and/or its
equipment for purposes of production and/or transmission of material, as
contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.
   VIDEO PROGRAMMING. Programming provided by or generally considered
comparable to programming provided by a television broadcast station.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.006 ADMINISTRATION; DELEGATION OF POWERS AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Council/franchising authority is hereby designated the officer of
the city which is responsible for the continuing administration of this
chapter.
   (B)   Unless prohibited by federal or state law, the Council/franchising
authority may delegate its powers and authorities with respect to administering
either an MCS provider or a franchise agreement, to a duly authorized
representative of the city, including the Mayor, the City Manager, or a City
Cable Advisory Committee.
   (C)   However, the Council/franchising authority may never delegate its
franchising or revocation power to another person.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.007 APPLICABILITY TO AN MCS PROVIDER.
   (A)   Unless exempted entirely from this chapter, or exempted under one or
more provisions of this chapter, or granted relief (by the Council/franchising
authority) from one or more provisions and/or requirements of this chapter,
then this chapter shall be applicable to an MCS provider, and this chapter
shall have full effect and be enforceable in its entirety. Moreover, a non-
exempt MCS provider shall be expected to comply with this chapter no later than
nine months after this chapter becomes effective, except where a different
compliance date is given or noted (including a different date noted in an
applicable franchise agreement).
   (B)   Division (A) of this section is not intended to repeal, and does not
have the effect of repealing Ordinance No. 12-1993-43 or any current
franchising ordinance that presently exists between the Council/franchising
authority and a franchised MCS provider.
   (C)   As a result of division (B) of this section, the provisions of this
chapter which are inconsistent with an existing franchise or Ordinance No. 12-
1993-43 shall have no effect on an existing franchise ordinance until the
expiration of the existing franchise, or until one of the following events
occurs:
      (1)   Prior to the expiration of the franchise, the Council/franchising
authority and the affected MCS provider either execute an amended franchise or
renewal franchise in which both parties agree to be bound by the terms of the
chapter or the expiration of the existing franchise.
      (2)   Ordinance No. 12-1993-43 is specifically repealed.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.008 EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN MCS PROVIDERS.
   (A)   Recognizing the inherent technological differences between various
types of MCS providers, and taking into account a number of financial,
operational, and maintenance considerations, the Council/franchising authority
exempts certain MCS providers from complying with the provisions contained in
this chapter.
   (B)   MCS providers who are exempted from complying with the provisions of
this chapter are as follows:
      (1)   An MCS provider who is exempted from this chapter as a result of an
applicable FCC ruling; or
      (2)   An MCS provider who is exempted from this chapter as a result of an
applicable judicial ruling.
   (C)   It is expressly understood that an exempted MCS provider remains
exempted only as long as it meets one or more of the specifications of this
particular section.
   (D)   It also is expressly noted that the extent of the exemption for a
qualified MCS provider is only for this chapter. Consequently, such an exempted
MCS provider is expected to abide by and comply with any other applicable city,
state, or federal laws and regulations, including any applicable federal, or
state consumer protection or customer service laws and regulations.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.009 NON-EXEMPT MCS PROVIDERS SEEKING RELIEF FROM THIS CHAPTER.
   (A)   Any MCS provider affected by this chapter may file a written petition,
at any time, with the Council/franchising authority seeking relief from one or
more provisions of this chapter. The relief requested may specifically include
the delay in implementation (as to the petitioning MCS provider only) of one or
more provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   In order to receive any relief from one or more of the provisions of
this chapter, a non-exempt MCS provider must satisfactorily demonstrate to the
Council/franchising authority that at least one of the following facts exist:
      (1)   The provisions and/or requirement is expressly prohibited by
federal or state law, or by the FCC; or
      (2)   Where applicable, that the provision in question materially affects
and is in conflict with an expressed right that is specifically noted in an
existing franchise agreement (but only for the term of the existing franchise).
This provision covers situations where an MCS provider known as a cable
operator seeks, and is granted, modification of an existing franchise agreement
under Section 625 of the CCPA, codified at 47 USC 545; or
      (3)   That the imposition of such provisions and/or requirements will
create such an undue economic hardship on an MCS provider so as to imperil or
eliminate an MCS provider's ability to provide multi-channel service to a
majority of current subscribers; or
      (4)   That one or more time frames listed in this chapter are either
impossible to meet, or impractical to meet in light of the MCS provider's
operational policy; or
      (5)   That the MCS provider has its own construction, maintenance,
operation, or customer service policy, which the Council/franchising authority
deems comparable to, or exceeding, any provision and/or requirement from which
the MCS provider seeks relief.
   (C)   The Council/franchising authority shall have the responsibility of
determining whether and MCS provider's construction, maintenance, operation, or
customer service policy is comparable to, or exceeds, a similar provision in
this chapter. Note well, however, that the Council/franchising authority may
delegate investigative and reporting functions to an authorized representative
of the city.
   (D)   As an alternative to seeking an exemption, or requesting relief, an
MCS provider may submit a written request or petition for clarification on the
precise intent and effect that one or more provisions or sections of this
chapter has on the petitioning MCS provider.
   (E)   In accordance with this chapter, the Council/franchising authority may
charge the petitioning MCS provider with the actual costs for processing such a
petition, including any costs incurred by outside consultants who are retained
by the city to review an MCS provider's petition.
   (F)   In those instances where the Council/franchising authority grants an
exemption or relief to a franchised MCS provider, or deems a franchise MCS
provider's operational policy to be comparable to an chapter provision, then
the franchise agreement (initial, existing, or renewal) shall be amended within
30 days to reflect the exact extent of such exemption and/or relief. It should
be specifically noted that the benefit of such exemption, relief,
clarification, or comparable policy extends only to the MCS provider granted
such exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.010 FAILURE OF THE COUNCIL/FRANCHISING AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE THIS CHAPTER.
   A non-exempt MCS provider shall not be excused from complying with any of
the requirements of this chapter, or any subsequently adopted amendments to
this chapter, by any failure of the Council/franchising authority on any one or
more occasions to seek or insist upon compliance with such requirements or
provisions.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.011 MCS PROVIDERS OR THEIR ASSIGNEES SUBJECT TO PRESENT AND FUTURE
ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Any non-exempt MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee shall be
subject to, and expected to comply with, all ordinances now or hereafter
adopted and in effect within the city, including this ordinance, to the extent
that the MCS provider has not received an exemption or relief from the
ordinance(s).
   (B)   Any non-exempt MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee shall be
subject to, and expected to comply with, all federal and state laws, and with
all rules issued by all applicable regulatory agencies now or hereafter in
existence.
   (C)   Any non-exempt MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee shall be
subject to all lawful exercise of the city's police power.
   (D)   With respect to future ordinances noted in this section, nothing
contained herein prevents an MCS provider from exercising any and all of its
administrative and legal rights as to challenging the constitutionality,
applicability, and enforceability of the future ordinances.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.012 INCONSISTENCIES WITH FEDERAL OR STATE RULES, REGULATIONS OR LAWS.
   (A)   In any case of an actual inconsistency between any provision or
section of this chapter, and any provision or section of a federal or state
rule, regulation, or law, then the federal or state rule, regulation, or law
shall not only supersede the effect of the chapter, but also control in any
local application.
   (B)   The above division (A) specifically includes any situation wherein an
applicable federal or state judicial decision creates an actual inconsistency
with any provision or section of this chapter. In such a situation, the federal
or state judicial decision shall not only supersede the effect of the chapter,
but also control in any local application.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.013 CONFLICTS WITH AN EXISTING FRANCHISE AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Where there is a conflict (actual or apparent) between this chapter
granted after the date of enactment of this chapter and an existing and
applicable franchise agreement, the chapter shall control and prevail, unless
administratively agreed in writing, or judicially determined invalid,
unenforceable, or unconstitutional.
   (B)   In the case where a franchised MCS provider receives an exemption,
relief, clarification from one or more provisions or section of this chapter,
or has one or more of its policies deemed comparable to a provision contained
in this chapter, then the franchise agreement should specifically note such
exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy, and to the extent that
such an exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy is inconsistent
with a provision contained in this chapter, then the specifically noted
exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy language contained in
the franchise agreement shall control.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.014 THE COUNCIL/FRANCHISING AUTHORITY'S RETAINED RIGHTS AND AUTHORITIES.
   (A)   Subject to pre-emption by, or other approval authority of, the FCC or
any other federal or state governmental entity or agency, and to the extent
permitted by any applicable law, the Council/franchising authority retains the
authority to provide for:
      (1)   The regulation and control of any multi-channel system within the
geographical limits of city;
      (2)   The award and grant of an MCS franchise (where required) subsequent
to review of an application or proposal by the Council/franchising authority;
      (3)   The periodic review and/or amendment or repeal of all or part of
this chapter; and
      (4)   If mutually agreed to with a franchised MCS provider, the periodic
review and/or amendment of any existing franchise agreement.
   (B)   The Council/franchising authority retains the power to regulate or not
to regulate rates or charges associated with the providing of multi-channel
service classified as cable service by an MCS provider classified as a cable
operator.
   (C)   Subject to pre-emption by, or other approval authority of, the FCC or
any other federal or state governmental entity or agency, the Council/
franchising authority retains the jurisdiction to enforce all laws and
regulations relating to multi-channel customer service practices and consumer
protection.
   (D)   If the FCC, Congress, or other governmental agency with authority over
cable or any other MCS provider ever abrogates, deletes, removes, or otherwise
disposes of rules or standards that are referenced in this chapter, or relied
upon by the Council/franchising authority for purposes of MCS provider
compliance with this chapter, then the Council/franchising authority may
reinstate such rule or standard, to the extent not preempted by or inconsistent
with later adopted law or regulations. Reinstated rules or standards will have
the same weight (as allowed under prevailing law) as they had prior to their
initial deletion.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.015 MCS PROVIDER MAY PROMULGATE RULES.
   To the extent that they are consistent with the requirements and
responsibilities detailed in this chapter, and MCS provider is authorized to
promulgate such rules and internal practices as shall be necessary to enable it
to exercise its rights and perform its duties under this chapter, state law,
and the rules of any federal agency charged with the responsibility of
regulating MCS providers.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.016 NOTICES.
   (A)   Both the Council/franchising authority and each non-exempt MCS
provider shall provide the other party with the name and address of the contact
person designated to receive notices, filings, reports, records, documents, and
other correspondence. All notices shall be delivered to each party's contact
person by certified mail, return receipt requested, personal service with a
signed receipt of delivery, or overnight with receipt verification. All other
filings, reports, records, documents, and other correspondence may be delivered
by any permissible means including, but not limited to facsimile transmission
(faxing), personal service, overnight mail or package delivery, or delivery via
cable. The delivery of all notices, reports, records, and other correspondence
shall be deemed to have occurred at the time of receipt (unless otherwise
designated by state law).
   (B)   If the MCS provider is required to maintain a franchise, then the
designation of such contact person for notice purposes may be contained within
a franchise agreement.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.017 INDEMNITY.
   (A)   To the extent permitted by law, a non-exempt MCS provider shall at all
times defend, indemnify, protect, save harmless, and exempt the city, the
Mayor, the City Manager, the Council/franchising authority, their officers,
agents, servants, and employees from any and all penalty, damage, or charges
arising out of claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages
whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law
or in equity, which might be claimed now or in the future, which may arise out
of, or be caused by workers' compensation, or by the construction, erection,
location, products performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation,
replacement, removal or restoration of the multi-channel system within the city
by an intentional act or a negligent act or omission of an MCS provider, its
agents or employees, contractors, subcontractors, independent contractors, or
implied or authorized representatives. With respect to the penalties, damages
or charges referenced herein, attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and expert
witness fees are included as those costs which may be recovered by the Council/
franchising authority.
   (B)   The city, Mayor, and the Council/franchising authority specifically
reserve the right to retain counsel of their own choice, at their own expense.
   (C)   If an MCS provider obtains counsel for the city, the Mayor, or the
Council/franchising authority, then any one of them shall have the right to
approve counsel.
   (D)   Neither the city, the Mayor, nor the Council/franchising authority
shall unreasonably withhold its approval of counsel.
   (E)   With respect to an MCS provider's own defense of such actions noted in
this section, it is understood that such MCS provider reserves the right to
select and retain, without the Council/franchising authority's approval,
counsel of the MCS provider's choice at provider's expense.
   (F)   Where arbitration is permitted in a franchise agreement, or agreed to
in writing by the MCS provider and Council/franchising authority, the
arbitration provisions shall specify to what extent costs are to be borne by
either the Council/franchising authority, and the MCS provider.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.018 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   (A)   An MCS provider may be required to secure and maintain, for as long as
it provides multi-channel service to subscribers, public liability, property
damage insurance, and umbrella coverage in at least the following amounts:
      (1)   Public liability: $2,000,000 per person/per occurrence;
      (2)   Property damage: $2,000,000 per any one claim;
      (3)   Umbrella liability: $4,000,000 with up to a $50,000 deductible and/
or base insurance.
   (B)   Note well, however, that insurance requirements should be consistent
for MCS providers who offer multi-channel service to more than 10% of the
residents within the city. Consequently, the Council/franchising authority may
not impose more restrictive or burdensome insurance requirements on any other
MCS providers who meet the above service thresholds, except as provided in
division (E) below.
   (C)   An MCS provider's public and personal liability and property damage
insurance policy shall specifically include the city, the Mayor, and the
Council/franchising authority as additional insureds.
   (D)   The public and personal liability and property damage insurance policy
shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance company licensed
to do business in the state, and which has one of the three highest or best
ratings from the Alfred M. Best Company.
   (E)   Should the Council/franchising authority make a formal determination
that due to the financial, operational, technical, or legal status (or lack
thereof) or condition of the MCS provider, the above-referenced requirements
for minimal insurance are inadequate, then the Council/franchising authority
may require the MCS provider to obtain and maintain insurance for greater
minimal amounts, up to but not exceeding $5,000,000 for public liability,
$5,000,000 for property damage, and $10,000,000 for umbrella liability.
   (F)   The public liability and property damage insurance policy shall
contain an endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the Council/
franchising authority with at least 30 days written notice in advance of the
cancellation of the insurance.
   (G)   Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to
the Council/franchising authority at least 10 days before the expiration of the
insurance which such policies are to renew or replace.
   (H)   Before a multi-channel system provides multi-channel service to
subscribers, the MCS provider shall deliver the policies or certificates
representing the insurance to the Council/franchising authority, and each
policy or certificate delivered shall be accompanied by evidence of payment of
the premium thereon.
   (I)   If the state permits an MCS provider to self-insure, then the MCS
provider may exercise its right to self-insure, so long as the minimal amounts
of insurance coverage outlined in this section are met and maintained for the
entire period of that the affected MCS provider is self-insured. However, for
the reasons listed in division (E) of this section, the Council/franchising
authority may make a formal determination and require an increase in the
minimal amounts of insurance coverage.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.019 PERFORMANCE AND CONSTRUCTION/COMPLETION BOND.
   (A)   An MCS provider shall furnish the Council/franchising authority, in an
amount totalling at least $100,000, a performance bond or security bond
executed by a surety licensed to business in this state. The purpose of the
performance bond is to ensure performance of any requirements imposed by this
chapter on an MCS provider. Further, the purpose is to guarantee that should
the MCS provider not fulfill any obligations imposed by this chapter (or where
applicable a franchise agreement), then the surety will make whole (to the
extent of the policy) any monetary losses incurred by the city.
   (B)   An MCS provider shall furnish to the Council/franchising authority a
construction/completion bond prior to the time it commences a construction,
upgrade, rebuild, or repair/maintenance project that has a capital construction
cost or outlay exceeding $50,000 in value. The amount of the bond shall equal
at least 90% of the projected capital construction cost or outlay. The
construction/completion bond shall remain in force at all times, unless relief
is granted or a reduction schedule is detailed in an agreement between the
Council/franchising authority and the MCS provider.
   (C)   The construction/completion bond or security bond shall specifically
guarantee that an MCS provider will timely abide by its construction, upgrade,
rebuild, or repair/maintenance schedule for the multi-channel system and/or any
timetable for technical and service improvements or additions to the multi-
channel system as may be committed to, or agreed upon, from time to time, by
the Council/franchising authority and MCS provider.
   (D)   If the city draws on a performance or completion bond or cash deposit
as a result of an MCS provider's failure to timely discharge its obligations,
or failure to construct and activate the multi-channel system, or failure to
complete a multi-channel system upgrade or rebuild or repair/maintenance, then
the MCS provider shall be required, within 30 days to replenish the completion
and performance bond or security bond to the minimal level required by the
Council/franchising authority.
   (E)   Should the Council/franchising authority make a formal determination
that due to the MCS provider's past performance (such as a documented history
of repeated or multiple franchise violations), or increased cost (greater than
50% of the original estimated cost), or documented untimeliness, or
incompletion of projects listed in construction schedules, the Council/
franchising authority may raise the required amount of either the performance
or the construction/completion bond.
   (F)   The performance bond or security bond shall be in force at all times
unless relief is granted or a reduction schedule is detailed in a written
agreement between the MCS provider and the Council/franchising authority.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.020 REPORTS AND RECORDS; POLICY.
   (A)   The Council/franchising authority recognizes that advances in
technology and the adoption and application of a multi-channel laws, rules,
regulations, and court decisions may have a profound effect and impact on an
MCS provider in any given year.
   (B)   Consequently, it is incumbent that the Council/franchising authority
take measures to reduce the risk that multi-channel service or the multi-
channel system will be adversely affected in any given year.
   (C)   Therefore, the evaluation of legal, technical, financial, and
character qualifications of an MCS provider is viewed as a constant undertaking
on the part of the city. As a result, the Council/franchising authority
requires that the operator maintain and retain all records and reports
necessary for the Council/franchising authority to determine compliance with
the obligations imposed on an MCS provider, and to determine the MCS provider's
legal, technical, financial, and character qualifications for the proceeding
four years.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.021 FURNISHING OF REPORTS.
   (A)   Within 90 days after this chapter becomes effective, and thereafter,
at least once every 12 months, an MCS provider shall submit a list to the
Council/franchising authority, or designee, of files, reports, records, data,
or other information that the MCS provider periodically files with the FCC, or
another federal or state agency. If the MCS files a non-periodic or non-regular
file with the FCC, or another federal or state agency, then the MCS shall,
within 60 days of that filing, notify the Council/franchising authority of such
federal or state filing. As part of a performance evaluation, or for any
legitimate matter related to the administration of an MCS provider (or if
applicable the MCS provider's franchise), the Council/franchising authority may
specifically request that it be provided with any or all listed reports,
records, data, or other information that were originally filed with the FCC, or
another federal or state agency. However, unless specifically authorized by the
state, an MCS provider shall not be required to provide to the Council/
franchising authority any state or federal tax returns, or any documents
(inclusive of all above-referenced categories) exempted under federal privacy
laws, including Section 631 of the CCPA, codified at 47 USC 551, as amended.
   (B)   In addition to the requirements noted in division (A) of this section,
an MCS provider shall timely submit those reports, statements, and logs
required by this chapter, including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   A periodic gross revenue statement in the manner set forth in this
chapter;
      (2)   A periodic certification that answering of phones is meeting the
specifications listed in this chapter;
      (3)   Preventive maintenance reports in the manner set forth in this
chapter; and
      (4)   Any other reports or information required by another section of
this chapter, or by the Council/franchising authority which are necessary to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.022 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   An MCS provider shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts and
records of the business and operations under and in connection with the MCS
system.
   (B)   The Council/franchising authority shall have the right to review
(either by mail or at the MCS provider's local office) all records needed for
the administration enforcement of this chapter or any franchise on seven days
written notice. Such review, unless mutually agreed upon or judicially ordered
should occur within the MCS provider's regular office hours.
   (C)   The Council/franchising authority shall have the right to hire, at its
own expense, an independent certified public accountant or other business or
financial expert to review the books and records of an MCS provider. If after a
financial audit it is determined that the MCS provider has under paid amounts
owed to the city (in excess of 2%), then the city may require the MCS provider
to reimburse the city for the actual cost of the audit. Note well, however,
that absent fraud, all audits shall be binding on the city.
   (D)   A false entry into the books and/or records of an MCS provider made by
an MCS provider of a material and substantial fact shall constitute a material
violation of this chapter. However, an erroneous entry, made in good faith,
shall not constitute a material violation of this chapter.
   (E)   An MCS provider at the local office shall keep complete and accurate
books and records of the key aspects of the multi-channel system's operation
for at least the preceding four years in such a manner that all matters
pertaining to the city can be easily produced and/or verified at the city's
request. Also, the MCS provider shall keep at its local office and shall make
available and provide upon request any other applicable records and information
that may be required by any other federal or state agency having jurisdiction
over MCS providers.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.023 CONTINUED USE OF INDIVIDUAL ANTENNAS PROTECTED.
   (A)   The Council/franchising authority does not intend to prohibit the
erection or continued use of individual television antennas within the city so
long as the individual television antennas conform to any and all applicable
zoning and/or land use regulations. Consequently, no person shall be required
to receive multi-channel service, or to physically connect to a multi-channel
system.
   (B)   It is also noted that no person shall be penalized or fined (through
either a home sales contract, deed of restrictive covenants, or other type of
agreement) for failing or refusing to receive multi-channel service, or
physically connecting to a multi-channel system.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.024 ALERTING SUBSCRIBERS IN THE EVENT OF AN EMERGENCY; STANDBY POWER.
   (A)   In order that subscribers may be alerted in the event of an impending,
imminent or actual, natural or man-made emergency, then all MCS providers shall
ensure that the multi-channel system providing multi-channel service to all or
part of the city is designed so as to permit an authorized official of the city
to override the audio portion of all channels, by touch-tone phone (or
functional equivalent) from any location.
   (B)   In addition to any other requirements listed in this section, and MCS
provider shall:
      (1)   Designate a channel which will be used for emergency broadcasts of
both audio and video. This channel need not be solely use for emergency
broadcasts, and may in fact be used for any lawful purpose;
      (2)   Inform subscribers of the designated emergency channel on a
periodic basis (not less than twice a month);
      (3)   Maintain all channel video blanking capability to facilitate the
needs of hearing and sight-impaired customers;
      (4)   Test the emergency override system not less than once a month;
      (5)   Cooperate with the city on the use and operation of the emergency
alert override system; and
      (6)   Develop a plan (with the city's concurrence) in order to provide
continuity of multi-channel service, and response to service calls in the event
of a natural or man-made emergency.
   (C)   As one method of providing continuity of multi-channel services in the
event of a natural or man-made emergency, an MCS provider shall, unless
exempted by the Council/franchising authority, have the capacity for two-hour
automatically activated standby power on all trunk and feeder cable, and all
headends, hubs, and reception sites associated with the distribution of service
to and throughout the city. The capacity shall automatically be increased when
technologically feasible.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.025 SAFETY ALERT TECHNOLOGY.
   (A)   The city may require an MCS provider, as a means of protecting the
health, safety and welfare of the public and of communicating with the public,
who utilizes a means of transmission that allows such, to provide a technology
or service that:
      (1)   Provides effectively instantaneous access into potentially every
home, regardless of whether or not one subscribes to basic cable service;
      (2)   Does not require that the television be turned on, or the volume
turned up to receive the message;
      (3)   Does not require that the resident be home at the time of
transmission to receive the message;
      (4)   Covers the entire range of human hearing;
      (5)   Stores the message in case no one is home at the time;
      (6)   Has an emergency audio alert intended to awaken a sleeping
individual;
      (7)   Can notify any one, or combination of discreet segments of the
population, without unnecessarily alarming the rest of the populace;
      (8)   Provides a different alert notification for emergency and non-
emergency situations;
      (9)   Is tied directly into the local office of the National Weather
Service's Site Selection weather warning service and standard weather radio
service.
   (B)   In the event the city chooses not to require the provision of the
technology or service, the MCS provider shall reserve the bandwidth necessary
for the provision of the service for use by any third party designated or
approved by the city/franchising authority.
   (C)   The city/franchising authority designates the necessary bandwidth as a
form of Governmental Access and as such may require the provision of the
necessary bandwidth at no charge.
   (D)   The city/franchising authority requires the MCS provider the necessary
bandwidth to fully and completely cooperate with the city/franchising
authority, and any third party provider of the service, in all matters related
to the provision of the service, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Making the public aware of the availability of the service;
      (2)   Educating the public as to the benefits, value and use of the
service;
      (3)   The distribution and installation of any in-home device(s) needed
for the reception and use of the service;
      (4)   The provision of the service to the public.
   (E)   The city may allow the operator to propose an alternative technology
or service that meets, to the extent possible, the capabilities set forth in
division (A).
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.026 PROVIDING BROAD CATEGORIES OF VIDEO PROGRAMMING; OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   The Council/franchising authority recognizes that under Section 624 of
the CCPA, codified at 47 USC 544, the legal power of local government is
severely restricted in requiring and/or demanding that particular video
programming or other services be provided to subscribers over the multi-channel
system.
   (B)   Nevertheless, the Council/franchising authority recognizes that it
should strive to ensure that its citizens receive the widest and most diverse
selection of video programming possible. Consequently, for those MCS providers
required to maintain a franchise, the Council/franchising authority states as
its objective to such franchised MCS providers that the provision of video
programming to subscribers should include the following broad categories:
      (1)   Local broadcast stations;
      (2)   Two distant carriage signals or satellite-fed broadcast stations;
      (3)   PEG programming on the lowest offered and/or available tier;
      (4)   Sports programming services (regional and/or national);
      (5)   News, information, or public affairs/interest programming services;
      (6)   Financial/consumer-oriented programming services;
      (7)   Scientific and/or cultural programming services;
      (8)   Children's programming services; and
      (9)   Ethnically sensitive programming services.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.027 PROVIDING SEAMLESS OR SEE-THROUGH TECHNOLOGY; OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   The Council/franchising authority recognizes the fact that it is in
the public's interest to be able to utilize the functions inherent in
subscriber receiving equipment without having to incur additional costs to
obtain the same functions.
   (B)   Consequently, the Council/franchising authority may require that,
unless a franchised MCS provider can demonstrate to the city that it is
technically or economically unfeasible or commercially impracticable, then such
MCS provider shall provide the ability to utilize the functions inherent in
subscriber equipment in a seamless or see-through manner which allows:
      (1)   The use of any built-in remote control capability of a subscriber's
television for the control of any and all television channels provided by the
franchised MCS provider without the use or necessity of additional equipment;
and
      (2)   The ability to record video programming on any channel provided by
the MCS provider while watching programming on any different channel without
the use or necessity of any additional in-home equipment other than the
television receiver/monitor and a recorder.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.028 TAMPERING; UNAUTHORIZED RECEPTION OF CERTAIN SERVICES.
   (A)   Consistent with Section 633 of the CCPA, codified at 47 USC 553, no
person shall intercept or receive, or assist in intercepting or receiving any
communications service offered over a multi-channel system unless specifically
authorized to do so by an MCS provider, or as may otherwise be specifically
authorized by law.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the term ASSIST IN INTERCEPTING OR
RECEIVING shall include the manufacture or distribution of equipment intended
by the manufacturer or distributor (as the case may be) for the unauthorized
reception of multi-channel service as noted in division (A) of this section.
   (C)   Without securing permission from an MCS provider, or making payment to
an MCS provider, then no person shall be authorized to make any connection,
whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with
any part of an authorized or franchised multi-channel system for purpose of
receiving or intercepting, or assisting other to receive or intercept any cable
service provided lawfully by the MCS provider.
   (D)   No person shall be authorized to willfully tamper with, remove or
damage any cable, wires, equipment or facilities used for the distribution of
multi-channel services.
   (E)   Any and all MCS providers are encouraged to work with the Council/
franchising authority in developing and implementing a plan designed to control
and eliminate the unauthorized reception of certain cable services within the
city.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999 
NOTIFICATION OF SERVICES; BILLING
§ 112.045 NOTIFICATION OF RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES; POLICY.
   (A)   The Council/franchising authority recognizes that it is critical that
a customer of an MCS provider fully understands and realizes the rights and
responsibilities of both the customer and MCS provider with respect to the
provision, maintenance, and repair of multi-channel service.
   (B)   Further, the Council/franchising authority believes that if sufficient
information is provided to a customer on certain customer service practices
such as rates, billing periods, number and types of services provided, and
rules concerning equipment use and return, then that customer will have the
information necessary to make an informed decision on what, if any, multi-
channel services to subscribe to and receive.
   (C)   In order to provide customers with the variety of information needed
to make an informed decision, and to ensure that customers are notified of
their and the MCS provider's rights and responsibilities with respect to the
multi-channel system, an MCS provider must provide a customer with a written
Notice of a Customer's and MCS Provider's Rights and Responsibilities with
Respect to the Provision of Multi-Channel Service.
   (D)   The Notice of a Customer's and MCS Provider's Rights and
Responsibilities with Respect to the Provision of Multi-Channel Service shall
be provided at the time of initial installation. Thereafter, a subscriber shall
be provided with a written Notice at least once every 12 months. If, however,
an MCS provider amends, repeals, adds, deletes, modifies, or makes other
changes to any customer service practice that is required in this chapter, then
the MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with such written notification at
least 30 days prior to the effective date of such amendment, repeal, addition,
deletion, modification, or other change.
   (E)   Unless expressly prohibited by the state, an MCS provider may comply
with the notice requirements by providing the notice over the MCS system, on a
channel clearly designated for the dissemination of such information. Such a
channel need not be solely designated for dissemination of such information,
and may, in fact, be used at other times for any lawful purpose.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.046 NOTICE OF RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES; PROVIDING MULTI-CHANNEL
SERVICE; MINIMUM CONTENTS.
   (A)   At the time an MCS provider is required to furnish an initial or
annual notice, such notice shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   An up-to-date listing of the specific multi-channel service
provided, clearly indicating and isolating the basic, premium, and
informational services offered, as well as the service tiers or service
clusters offered;
      (2)   Notification of a subscriber's ability to purchase or lease from
the MCS provider a lock box, parental control mechanism, or other device which
will prohibit the viewing of a particular multi-channel service during a period
selected by the subscriber;
      (3)   Pursuant to FCC regulations, a subscriber's ability of purchasing
or using an A/B or input selector switch;
      (4)   A comprehensive listing and explanation of all rates and charges
(including rates for standard or basic premium channels/services, particular
service tiers or service clusters, current discount or promotional fees,
installation charges and security deposits, if any);
      (5)   If service clustering is available, then a description and
explanation of any penalties, credits, restrictions, upcoming (within 60 days
of the notice) service clustering changes or differing alignments, or other
pertinent information;
      (6)   A comprehensive listing and explanation of all billing options
available (such as monthly, quarterly, or yearly, and/or discounts for pre-
payments);
      (7)   The customer service office hours and telephone number(s) in a
manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this chapter;
      (8)   The billing practices of an MCS provider in a manner consistent
with the specific policy set forth in this chapter;
      (9)   The specific customer complaint/inquiry resolution policy that is
adopted and followed by an MCS provider and which is consistent with the
parameters set forth in this chapter;
      (10)    If applicable and permitted, the rules and regulations for using
any facilities, including a studio or mobile van of an MCS provider;
      (11)    The method of securing a voluntary disconnection in a manner
consistent with the specific policy set forth in this chapter;
      (12)    Rules relating to both connections and involuntary
disconnections;
      (13)    The extent of the credit/refund policy in a manner consistent
with the specific policy set forth in this chapter;
      (14)    The equipment use and return policy together with any required
security deposits in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in
this chapter; and
      (15)    The additional rights of blind, hearing-impaired or ambulatory-
impaired customers in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in
this chapter.
   (B)   The notice shall be written in plain, simple to understand English.
The notice shall contain no fine print, and any exclusions, limitations, or
caveats shall be clearly indicated as such in the notice.
   (C)   The notice may be delivered to a subscriber via an insert in the
subscriber's periodic invoice, or through a special mailing, or over an MCS
channel clearly designated for the dissemination of such information.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.047 BILLING PRACTICES.
   (A)   Within the notice that is required by this chapter, subscribers shall
be informed of at least the following billing practices of an MCS provider:
      (1)   Billing procedures (including payments necessary to avoid
discontinuance of service);
      (2)   Payment due and delinquent dates;
      (3)   Amount of percentage of late charges, if any;
      (4)   Advance billing options;
      (5)   Resolution procedures for billing disputes, complaints, and
inquiries;
      (6)   Refund policy for service interruptions, substandard signal
quality, or uncontracted service;
      (7)   Current service rates in a detailed and understandable format;
      (8)   Procedure and amount of charges for installation or relocation of
an MCS provider's facilities and/or equipment;
      (9)   Current schedule and explanation for any billed charges or other
non-regularly occurring fees invoiced to subscribers; and
      (10)    Any lower-income or fixed income rates together with any
qualifications to obtain such rates.
   (B)   All periodic service bills shall plainly state that service may be
paid on an individual monthly basis by the end of the month for which the
service was delivered with no late charge or penalty assessed.
   (C)   Existing subscribers shall be informed of the items listed in division
(A) of this section at least once every 12 months.
   (D)   Whenever there is a change in an MCS provider's billing practices or
payment requirements, all subscribers must be notified in writing at least 30
days before such billing practices or payment requirements become effective.
   (E)   In any case where a subscriber requests a cancellation or reduction of
service within 30 days after the notification of a schedule rate or charge
adjustment, then the subscriber's liability for the newly implemented rate or
charge shall cease from the moment that the rate or charge adjustment becomes
effective.
   (F)   Cable operators may identify as a separate line item of each regular
subscriber bill the following:
      (1)   The amount of the total bill assessed as a franchise fee.
      (2)   The amount of the total bill assessed to satisfy any requirements
imposed on the cable operator by the franchise agreement to support public,
educational, or governmental channels or the use of such channels.
      (3)   The amount of any other fee, tax, assessment, or charge of any kind
imposed by any governmental authority on the transaction between the operator
and the subscriber. In order for a governmental fee or assessment to be
separately identified under this section, it must be directly imposed by a
governmental body on a transaction between a subscriber and an operator.
   (G)   The charge identified on the subscriber bill as the total charge for
cable service should include all fees and costs itemized pursuant to this
section.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.048 BILLING CREDIT FOR SERVICE OUTAGES; INTERRUPTIONS; SUBSTANDARD SIGNAL
OR PICTURE QUALITY OR UNSOLICITED SERVICE.
   (A)   An MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with a pro rata credit for
service outage exceeding eight hours in duration.
   (B)   Where not expressly prohibited by the state, the Council/franchising
authority may prescribe rules for giving credit to a subscriber in cases of
substandard signal or picture quality.
   (C)   In the case of a charge for unsolicited service, an MCS provider shall
provide a subscriber with an adjustment or billing credit on the next available
billing statement. Moreover, in such a case, an MCS provider shall not consider
a subscriber delinquent for failure to pay a charge for unsolicited service.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.049 PROHIBITION AGAINST NEGATIVE OPTION PROMOTIONAL PACKAGE.
   (A)   The Council/franchising authority both recognizes and determines that
as a matter of consumer protection, a subscriber should be charged only for
those services that such subscriber has affirmatively and specifically
requested. Therefore, an MCS provider may not bill or invoice any subscriber
for any multi-channel service that is not affirmatively requested by the
subscriber by name.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, a subscriber's affirmative request need
not be in writing, but an MCS provider relying on an oral request must keep an
accurate, precise, and exact record of the date, and time the request was made
and the CSR or service technician to whom the request was made.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, a subscribers shall be deemed to have
affirmatively requested a multi-channel service if:
      (1)   The subscriber voluntarily makes payment for the multi-channel
service after an initial free trial period; and
      (2)   There was included in the notice or advertising material describing
the service a statement clearly advising the subscriber that such subscriber
has incurred no obligation to pay for such service, and that such subscriber
need not take any action to avoid incurring any such obligation.
   (D)   Moreover, an MCS provider may not automatically enroll a subscriber
into a different class or tier of multi-channel service without first
informing, at least 30 days in advance, such subscriber of any and all costs
associated with such a different call or tier of multi-channel service.
   (E)   Additionally, an MCS provider may not invoice a subscriber for
disconnecting or downgrading from a negatively promoted or automatically
enrolled class or tier or multi-channel service.
   (F)   Should a subscriber be charged for a multi-channel service in
violation of this section, then the MCS provider shall provide a subscriber
with an adjustment or billing credit on the next available billing statement.
Moreover, in such case, an MCS provider shall not consider a subscriber
delinquent for failure to pay a charge for a non-affirmatively requested multi-
channel service.
   (G)   This provision, however, shall not preclude the addition or deletion
of a specific program from a service offering, the addition or deletion of
specific channels from an existing tier of service, or the restructuring or
division of existing tiers of service that do not result in a fundamental
change in the nature of an existing service or tier of service, provided that
such change is otherwise consistent with applicable regulations.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.050 SALES SOLICITATIONS; SPECIAL RULES.
   (A)   For MCS providers engaged in sales solicitations via phone, cellular
phone, interactive multi-channel system, PCN, or other type of personal
communications system, the following rules apply (unless preempted by federal
or state law):
      (1)   Sales solicitors identify themselves as sales solicitors at the
outset of the communication by saying, “I am a sale solicitor.”;
      (2)   Sales solicitors must not engage in bait-and-switch tactics, that
is they must not initially offer a lower priced service only to inform the
customer of its unavailability, or offer the lower priced service in order to
pressure sale a higher priced service; and
      (3)   Sales solicitors must quote the full and complete cost for any
service sold or subscribed to during the course of the communication.
   (B)   The restrictions outlined in division (A) of this section shall not
apply to sales solicitations which are done or occur in the following
circumstances:
      (1)   In response to a customer's specific request;
      (2)   In connection with a charitable contribution or charitable purpose
for which 90% of the proceeds are delivered to a bona fide charitable
organization recognized as such by Internal Revenue Service Regulations;
   (C)   This restriction outlined in division (A) of this section shall not
apply to sales solicitations via printed material in that such printed
solicitations or advertisements are deemed not as disruptive or intrusive as
solicitations noted in division (A) of this section.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.051 MENU-DRIVEN SYSTEMS, SERVICE CLUSTERS, AND PACKAGING OF SERVICE
TIERS; SPECIAL RULES.
   (A)   The Council/franchising authority recognizes that the concept of menu-
driven program/service selection has both positive and negative aspects. On the
one hand, menu-driven program/service selection allows the greatest flexibility
for a subscriber in that it permits the subscriber to essentially create a
program/service package tailored to the subscriber's budget, viewing habits,
and informational needs. On the other hand, menu-driven program/service
selection is susceptible to unauthorized or unknowing purchases, and uninformed
program choices if certain procedural and operational safeguards are not
maintained.
   (B)   Should an MCS provider implement and/or offer menu-driven program/
service selection for all,or the majority of the MCS provider's multi-channel
services, then the Council/franchising authority reserves the power to adopt
additional rules and regulations (subject to the conditions listed in division
(C) of this section) concerning the following potential problem areas:
      (1)   Notification to the subscriber on a periodic (at least monthly)
basis of the exact costs for each menu-driven program/service, including any
installation or equipment rental charges;
      (2)   Notification of what constitutes, or what is required for selection
or subscription to a particular program/service;
      (3)   Limitations or prohibitions on negative option marketing plans when
done in connection with a menu-driven system unless the subscriber is initially
is informed, consents (in writing), and periodically (at least semi-annually)
renews the consent to be included on a list of potential subscribers; and
      (4)   Restricting access to menu-driven program/service selection by
subscribers through the use of individual, non-duplicative access codes or some
other means, in order to limit unauthorized purchases, or purchases above a
certain pre-set amount (without additional written approval).
   (C)   If, at the time an MCS provider implements and/or offer menu-driven
program/service selection, such MCS provider also adopts an operational policy
which protects subscribers from those potential problem areas listed in
division (B) of this section, then the Council/franchising authority shall not
exercise its additional regulatory authority on this subject, unless there is
documentation that the adopted policy of the MCS is not being enforced, or is
ineffective in safeguarding subscribers from the potential abuses listed above.
   (D)   As for service clusters, and the packaging of service tiers, and to
provide both a disincentive for bait and switch tactics, and to promote cluster
and tier stability, an MCS provider may not switch any particular multi-channel
service from one tier or cluster to another without 60 days notice; provided,
however, that upon 60 days prior notice, an MCS provider may rearrange, retier,
recluster, or otherwise offer its multi-channel service in a manner consistent
with FCC regulations.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as mandating any
particular programming choice being provided to a subscriber. Nor should this
section be construed as requiring any particular program, service, cluster or
tier. Rather, this section is designed to promote cluster and tier stability so
that a subscriber may choose a program, service, cluster, or tier that best
suits the subscriber's individual programming and informational needs.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.052 DISCONNECTION FOR NON-PAYMENT.
   (A)   A subscriber shall not be considered delinquent in payment until at
least 45 days after the posting of the bill to the subscriber, and payment has
not been received by an MCS provider.
   (B)   Before disconnection of a subscriber's multi-channel service (either
physically or electronically) takes place, the following must occur:
      (1)   The subscriber must in fact be delinquent in payment of a multi-
channel service; and
      (2)   At least five days have elapsed after a separate written notice of
impending disconnection has been personally served upon the subscriber; or
      (3)   At least eight days have elapsed after mailing a separate written
notice of impending disconnection to the subscriber; or
      (4)   At least five days have elapsed after the subscriber has either
signed for or refused to accept a separate written notice of impending
disconnection.
   (C)   The written notice of disconnection must expressly and clearly state
the amount that is owed by the subscriber to an MCS provider, the minimum
amount required to be paid to avoid disconnection, and the date and place
within the city where such payment must be made.
   (D)   Disconnection of service must occur both on a normal service day and
within normal business hours of an MCS provider, unless the subscriber is given
the opportunity to pay the full amount of the past due amount.
   (E)   An MCS provider who physically retrieves its equipment, including
converter, remote control unit, or digital audio tuner, from a subscriber, must
do so within both a normal service day and normal service hours of an MCS
provider.
   (F)   Receipt of a bad check from a subscriber, in response to a written
notice of disconnection, does not constitute payment, and the affected MCS
provider need not give the subscriber further notice prior to disconnecting
multi-channel service.
   (G)   An MCS provider may add a reasonable collection charge to the
subscriber's bill if the applicable provisions of this chapter and any
applicable state or federal regulations are followed.
   (H)   Any refund due a subscriber after such a disconnection shall be made
within 60 days of the disconnection for non-payment.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.053 VOLUNTARY CUSTOMER CHANGES.
   (A)   This section shall govern charges for any changes in service tiers,
service cluster, menu-driven program/service, pay channel, premium channel,
informational service, entire multi-channel service or equipment provided to
the subscriber that are initiated at the request of a subscriber after initial
service installation.
   (B)   The charge for customer changes in service tiers effected solely by
coded entry on a computer terminal or by other similarly simple methods shall
be a nominal amount, not exceeding actual costs. The actual cost charge shall
be either the HSC, as defined in §
112.146, multiplied by the number of person hours need to implement the change,
or the HSC multiplied by the average number of person hours involved in
implementing customer changes.
   (C)   The charge for customer changes in service tiers or equipment that
involve more than coded entry on a computer or other similarly simple method
shall be based on actual cost.
   (D)   A cable operator may establish a higher charge for changes effected
solely by coded entry on a computer terminal or by other similarly simple
methods, subject to written approval by the city, for a subscriber changing
service tiers more than two times in a 12 month period, except for such changes
ordered in response to a change in price or channel line-up. If a cable system
adopts such an increased charge, the cable system must notify all subscribers
in writing that they may be subject to such a charge for changing service tiers
more than the specified number of times in any 12 month period.
     (E)   Downgrade charges that are the same as or lower than upgrade charges
are evidence of the reasonableness of such downgrade charges.
   (F)   For 30 days after notice of retiering or rate increases, a customer
may obtain changes in service tiers at no additional charge.
   (G)   From the date that such a subscriber makes such a request for either a
disconnect or downgrade, then the MCS provider shall have two days or 48
service hours, whichever is longer, to disconnect or downgrade the service
tier, pay channel, premium channel, informational service, or entire multi-
channel service. In the event that an MCS provider does not disconnect or
downgrade service within 48 hours, a subscriber's obligation to pay for such
service shall cease, or in the case of a downgrade, a subscriber's obligation
to pay for the more comprehensive and/or higher priced service shall cease.
   (H)   For a service tier, service cluster, menu-driven service, premium
channel or informational service which is voluntarily disconnected, a
subscriber shall pay a pro rata share of the monthly rate for such service
tier, service cluster, menu-driven service premium channel or informational
service.
   (I)   Once a valid connection to a menu-driven program or a pay-per-view
event occurs, then the MCS provider may collect the full advertised or quoted
rate should the customer then attempt to disconnect the menu-driven program or
pay-per-view.
   (J)   If, however, an MCS provider's equipment is or has been damaged by a
subscriber prior to such disconnection, then the MCS provider may charge the
subscriber with the entire cost for such damage, provided that the MCS provider
notifies the subscriber within 10 days of the disconnection. A subscriber shall
not be required to pay for equipment failure, if the circumstances fall within
the normal wear and tear guidelines established in this chapter.
   (K)   Any refund due a subscriber after voluntary disconnection shall be
made within 45 days after such disconnection. This division specifically
includes the situation where a subscriber voluntarily disconnects service but
is entitled to a refund as a result of a service outage that exceeds eight
hours in duration. In such case a subscriber will also receive any refund due
as a result of the service outage within 45 days after the voluntary
disconnection.
   (L)   In no event will this section be viewed as abridging the rights and
remedies afforded by the subscriber complaint/inquiry resolution process
outlined in this chapter.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
CUSTOMER SERVICES; EQUIPMENT
§ 112.070 CUSTOMER SERVICE HOURS; CAPABILITIES OF CUSTOMER SERVICE OFFICE;
TELEPHONE.
   (A)   In order to facilitate the needs of the local customers, and MCS
provider shall maintain a fully operational, full service customer service
office which is both within the city, and easily accessible to customers. No
change in location shall be made without the express written approval of the
Council/approving authority.
   (B)   The customer service office shall be open at least 50 hours per week
(exclusive of holidays).
   (C)   Within the 50 hours per week that a customer service office must be
open, an MCS provider must provide office hours either on at least two evenings
(after 5:00 p.m.), or on Saturdays and/or Sundays (if not prohibited by state
law). The office must remain open and fully operational from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. daily, Monday through Friday.
   (D)   The customer service office should have an adequate and knowledgeable
staff in order to handle the vast majority of customer services inquiries,
specifically including, but not limited to, billing inquiries, refunds, service
outages, equipment service and repair, payment of bills and other charges.
   (E)   An MCS provider may install at its customer service office an after
hours depository in order to collect invoice payments and receive requests for
service appointments (including connections, and disconnections) after
scheduled office hours.
   (F)   An MCS provider may install an automated (audio, or video) customer
assistance device or machine which can handle various types of customer
inquiries, but such automated device shall be provided in addition to personal,
live service outlined in this section.
   (G)   Neither the presence of an after hours depository or automated
customer service device relieves an MCS provider from maintaining the minimal
required number of office hours, or adequate CSR staff to handle the majority
of service inquiries.
   (H)   At least annually, any non-exempt MCS provider shall certify to the
Council/franchising authority that each customer service representative (CSR)
has taken and passed and MCS provider-implemented course designed to trains
CSRs to handle their jobs in a courteous, efficient, and responsive manner.
   (I)   An MCS provider shall maintain at least one toll-free and/or local
telephone number to accommodate normal business inquiries.
   (J)   An MCS provider shall maintain a separate 24 hour toll-free or local
telephone number to facilitate calls concerning repair of equipment and
extended interruption of service. During any hours that the customer service
office is open, the MCS provider must have or make available in-house personnel
to address a customer's inquiries. During other hours, a telephone may be
manned by an automatic answering device, provided that the use of an answering
device or answering service still results in an initial phone call by the MCS
provider within 60 minutes, in order to at least determine the extent of the
outage. The MCS provider shall not be required to make in-person telephone
contacts to subscribers at a rate which exceeds 60 calls per hour, and shall
not be required to make such calls between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
   (K)   A non-exempt MCS provider shall have adequate staff and/or extension
lines in order to handle calls to the general information number to the
following specifications:
      (1)   90% of all customer calls received in a year shall be answered
within three minutes by a representative of the MCS provider, or by a device
that is capable of complaint/inquiry resolution; and
      (2)   The rate of abandoned calls shall be less than 5% over a year's
period of time. Abandoned calls shall in no event be deemed to include calls in
which the caller hangs up within 45 seconds of making the call.
   (L)   With respect to the specifications listed in division (K) of this
section, it shall be the MCS provider's responsibility to certify monthly to
the Council/franchising authority that the affected MCS provider is meeting the
minimal specifications.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.071 PREFERENTIAL OR DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   An MCS provider shall not, as to rules, regulations, rates, charges,
provision of service, or use of a provider's facilities and equipment, make,
allow, or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person, nor subject
any person to prejudice or disadvantage on the basis of age, race, creed,
color, sex, national origin, handicap, religious affiliation or location of
residence.
   (B)   Consistent with Section 621(a)(3) of the CCPA, codified at 47 USC 541
(a)(3), MCS providers shall not deny cable service or the extension of cable
service to any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the
income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides.
   (C)   Division (A) of this section, however, does not prohibit an MCS
provider from offering a promotional or incentive discount rate or charge as
long as the rate or charge does not exceed 370 days in length. This subsection
does not prohibit an MCS provider from offering special incentive rates such as
one month basic service free, if 12 months of basic service are paid in one
payment, or within a certain time frame.
    (D)   Division (A) of this section also does not prohibit an MCS provider
from denying service based on location of residence if that residence is
outside the parameters for line extension as detailed in a franchise agreement
(if applicable).
   (E)   Division (A) of this section also does not prohibit an MCS provider
from denying service to a subscriber who is more than 30 days delinquent in the
payment of any periodic service or special service bill so long as the
requirements for disconnection (as outlined in this chapter) have been
satisfied.
   (F)   Division (A) of this section also does not prohibit an MCS provider
from implementing a carefully designed no-frills service tier or service
cluster for lower income and/or fixed income individuals.
   (G)   Division (A) of this section also does not prohibit an MCS provider
from making agreements or entering into multi-channel service agreements with
multiple dwelling unit owners (including hotel, motel, and mobile park owners)
to provide multi-channel service under a bulk billing or other type of
arrangement.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.072 USE AND RETURN OF EQUIPMENT; SECURITY DEPOSITS AND THEIR RETURN.
   (A)   Prior to formally delivering any equipment, including auxiliary
equipment (such as a conver-ter, input selector switch, or video control
recorder) to a customer, an MCS provider shall have tested a representative
sample (at least 1%) of such equipment to ensure that it is in proper working
order.
   (B)   If needed for proper operation, or requested by a customer, an MCS
provider shall deliver to a customer handwritten or typed instructions
detailing the proper use of rented, loaned, or purchased equipment. Unless
required by another section of this chapter, an MCS provider may comply with
this section by delivering the manufacturer's instructions to a customer.
   (C)   An MCS provider is not required to seek a security deposit from a
customer for use or rental of the MCS provider's equipment.
   (D)   An MCS provider shall comply with any and all applicable rules
concerning the imposition, retention, and return of security deposits.
   (E)   Unless prohibited by other applicable law, the security deposit for a
particular piece of equipment, then the MCS provider shall be prohibited from
charging any security deposit for equipment which exceeds the replacement cost
to the MCS provider.
   (F)   As a matter of consumer protection, an MCS provider shall be
prohibited from charging any security deposit for multi-channel service which
exceeds twice the basic monthly rate.
   (G)   An MCS provider may charge an appropriate security deposit (consistent
with division (F) of this section) in those instances where a customer is
reconnected after an involuntary disconnection for nonpayment or prior history
of unsatisfactory payment.
   (H)   An MCS provider shall return a security deposit (together with any
interest earned) after the equipment is satisfactorily returned, or the
subscriber maintains a satisfactory payment history (which is determined as no
payment delinquencies within the preceding 12 month period).
   (I)   A customer shall maintain any equipment rented or leased from an MCS
provider in good working order, and operate such equipment only in the manner
specified by the MCS provider or manufacturer of the equipment.
   (J)   A customer shall totally and fully reimburse an MCS provider for any
damage or loss of their equipment that is due to the customer's failure to
properly maintain and operate such equipment.
   (K)   A customer shall be relieved from any responsibility for reimbursing
an MCS provider for equipment which malfunctions or does not operate due to a
hidden or latent defect in the equipment, or for equipment which fails to
operate, or improperly operates due to natural occurrences conditioned by the
normal wear and tear of such equipment, or for equipment damaged or destroyed
by an act of nature, and which is not covered by a customer's home or apartment
insurance policy.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.073 SERVICE INQUIRY LOGS.
   (A)   An MCS provider shall be required to keep and maintain service inquiry
logs, subject to any limitations imposed by state or federal law, including
(for MCS providers classified as cable operators) any subscriber privacy
limitations imposed by state, federal or local law.
   (B)   The purpose of the service inquiry logs is to assist the city in
assessing (in the aggregate) the type, degree, and resolution of customer
service requests, inquiries, and complaints.
   (C)   At a minimum, the service inquiry logs should contain the following:
      (1)   The time and date of initial receipt of any service request,
inquiry, or complaint, together with the time and date of initial response to
that service request, inquiry or complaint;
      (2)   The nature of the service request, inquiry, or complaint;
      (3)   The precise action taken by an MCS provider in order to resolve the
service inquiry, request, or complaint;
      (4)   Whether the service request, inquiry, or complaint was resolved by
allowing a credit or refund of some sort; and
      (5)   The area, location, or quadrant of the city where the service
request, inquiry, or request was generated.
   (D)   In addition to any other right of inspection that the Council/
franchising authority may possess, it shall have the right to review and
inspect a compilation of such logs. However, the Council/franchising authority
shall not have the right of access, review, or inspection for any service
inquiry logs or any information contained within service inquiry logs that are
otherwise protected from access, review, or inspection by state or federal law.
   (E)   This section does not require MCS providers to maintain service
inquiry logs on scheduled installations.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.074 RESTORATION OF A SUBSCRIBER'S PROPERTY.
   (A)   At any time an MCS provider, in furtherance of its right to construct,
operate, and maintain a multi-channel system, disturbs the yard, residence, or
other real or personal property of a subscriber, such MCS provider shall ensure
that the subscriber's yard, residence, or other personal property is returned,
replaced, and/or restored to a condition that is sufficiently comparable to the
condition that existed prior to the commencement of the work.
   (B)   The costs associated with both the disturbance and the return,
replacement, and/or restoration shall be borne by the MCS provider. This
division also requires the MCS provider to reimburse a subscriber or private
property owner for any damage caused by the MCS provider, its subcontractor, or
its independent contractor, in connection with the disturbance of a subscriber
or private property owner's property which is not fully and completely restored
or repaired as required in division (A) of this section.
   (C)   The types of acts specifically included in this section are the
following:
      (1)   Removal of a subscriber's sod, lawn, plants, shrubbery, flowers,
trees, driveway, or fence to install, trench, repair, replace remove, or locate
cable or other equipment of an MCS provider;
      (2)   Installation or removal of cable or other equipment of an MCS
provider within a subscriber's residence which requires drilling, excavating,
plastering, or the like on the part of the MCS provider;
      (3)   Temporarily relocating or moving a piece of personal property or a
fixture of a subscriber, such as a motor vehicle, fence, air conditioning or
heating unit, or the like, in order to perform some sort of construction,
maintenance, or repair on the multi-channel system; or
      (4)   Permanently removing an MCS provider's cable or equipment due to
either the revocation, termination, or non-renewal of a franchise (if
applicable), or the abandonment, withdrawal, or cessation of multi-channel
service to any portion of the city.
   (D)   The requirements imposed upon the MCS provider extend to any
subcontractor or independent contractor that the MCS provider might employ to
perform the tasks outlined in this section.
   (E)   In light of the foregoing, an MCS provider has the authority and
responsibility to diligently trim trees of a private property owner (including
a subscriber), but only to the extent necessary to prevent the branches of the
trees from coming in contact with the MCS provider's wires and cables. The
manner of trimming shall be approved in writing by the Council/approving
authority.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.075 SERVICE INQUIRIES, REQUESTS, COMPLAINTS, AND RESPONSE TIMES.
   (A)   Except in times of a natural or man-made emergency, or an appointment
scheduled with the mutual consent of a subscriber, an MCS provider shall
respond to the service inquiries, requests, and complaints of subscribers
within such MCS provider's normal business or service hours, and within the
time schedules detailed in divisions (B) through (G) of this section. Moreover,
except in emergency situations, an MCS provider shall inform the customer
whether the service call is scheduled for the morning, afternoon, or evening
hours. If the service call has to be canceled or rearranged, then the MCS
provider shall make every effort to notify the customer as soon as possible,
and shall (unless the subscriber decides otherwise) re-schedule the service
call for a time within 24 hours of the cancellation. The term service call as
used in this section does not refer to initial installation.
   (B)   In the case of a signal or service interruption, an MCS provider shall
respond to and make repairs as are necessary to resume the signal or service to
the subscriber within 24 hours from the time the MCS provider first received
notification of the signal of service interruption.
   (C)   In the case of a blank or no-picture situation of any given level of
billing or service (except for pay-per-view events), an MCS provider shall
respond to and make repairs as are necessary to return the multi-channel
service within 24 hours from the time the MCS provider first received
notification of the blank or no-picture situation.
   (D)   In the case of a defective, improperly operating, or non-operating
piece of equipment, an MCS provider shall respond to and make repairs as are
necessary to correct the problem within 36 hours from the time the MCS provider
first received notification of the defective, improperly operating, or non-
operating piece of equipment.
   (E)   In the case of repair to a piece of equipment in a subscriber's
residence, or repair to the cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent),
the repair should be completed and the situation resolved at the conclusion of
the first service visit. If the repair is not completed and resolved within 3
visits, and if as a result of the insufficient repair a situation remains
wherein there is a visually or audibly detected degradation of a multi-channel
signal, then the MCS provider must immediately and completely either replace
all drop cable (coaxial, fiber or its functional equivalent), or isolate and
correct the source of signal degradation in order to rectify the situation.
   (F)   In no case shall a subscriber's service request or inquiry go
unresponded or unattended to for more than one work day from the time the MCS
provider first received notification of the service inquiry or request.
Moreover, except in emergency situations, all requests and inquiries shall be
handled or corrected within 36 hours from the time the MCS provider first
received notification. If a cancellation of a service call occurs, then the MCS
provider shall re-schedule the call in a manner consistent with the guidelines
expressed in division (A) of this section.
   (G)   In case of a dispute concerning the precise time that the MCS provider
received notification, or the precise circumstances surrounding the MCS
provider receiving the notification, or whether notification was received at
all, the Council/franchising authority shall reserve the right and authority to
settle such a dispute.
   (H)   Provided, however, that the MCS provider may rank service calls in
order of severity. That is, total outages will take precedence over area
outages; area outages take precedence over a single home and multi-channel
problems take presidency over a single channel.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.076 REPAIR PARTS AND REPAIR PERSONNEL.
   (A)   Except in times of natural or man-made emergency, an MCS provider
shall, at all times, have access to and be able to secure sufficient
maintenance and repair parts and equipment for the MCS system so that the MCS
provider can respond to and correct all subscriber service interruptions within
the time periods specified in this chapter.
   (B)   Having access to and being able to secure sufficient maintenance and
repair parts and equipment is necessary to promptly restore a subscriber's
multi-channel service and avoid delays caused by having to obtain needed parts
and equipment.
   (C)   Except in times of natural or man-made emergency, or a strike (whose
duration has been less than 72 hours), an MCS provider shall have sufficient
maintenance and repair personnel so that the MCS provider can respond to and
correct subscriber service interruptions within the time periods specified in
this chapter.
   (D)   An MCS provider shall annually certify the Council/franchising
authority that each service technician has taken and passed an MCS provider-
implemented course designed to train service technicians to handle their jobs
in a courteous, efficient, and responsive manner. Also, the course should be
designed to provide continuing education to service technicians in changes in
technology, repair/maintenance procedures and related matters.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the other requirements and provisions contained in
this section, an MCS provider shall maintain at least one service technician on
call 24 hours per day.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.077 NEW INSTALLATIONS AND CONNECTIONS; REGULAR, PROMOTIONAL, SEASONAL,
SHORT-TERM, PAY-PER-VIEW, AND MENU-DRIVEN; RE-CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   New installations, promotional, short-term, or seasonal connections,
re-connections, and upgrades of multi-channel service by an MCS provider shall
be performed and completed within seven days of a customer requesting such.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) shall not apply to pay-per-view or
menu-driven connections.
   (C)   While an MCS provider may charge a customer for installing,
connecting, or re-connecting multi-channel service, such charge must be
understood and approved by the customer prior to the installation, connection,
or re-connection.
   (D)   In the case of a promotional or seasonal connection, any limitations
or restrictions must be explained prior to the promotional or seasonal
connection.
   (E)   Any MCS provider may charge an appropriate re-connection charge or
require a security deposit in those instances where a customer is re-connected
after an involuntary disconnection for non-payment or a prior history of
unsatisfactory payment. However, the re-connection charge or security deposit
must be based on the prior unsatisfactory payment history, or involuntary
disconnection or the customer, and not the location or address of the residence
or structure.
   (F)   Downgrading a particular service level or service cluster to a lower-
priced or less compre-hensive service or cluster level shall not be considered
a connection to the lower-priced or less compre-hensive level of service. An
MCS provider shall comply with all rules concerning downgrading.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.078 PROTECTION OF SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY.
   (A)   An MCS provider shall abide by any and all subscriber privacy rules or
regulations of the federal or state governments.
   (B)   For MCS providers classified as cable operators, such operators shall
also abide by and comply with any subscriber privacy protection requirements
and procedures listed in Section 631 of the CCPA, codified at 47 USC 551.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.079 RESOLUTION OF COMPLAINTS/INQUIRIES.
   (A)   An MCS provider is required to develop a comprehensive complaint/
inquiry resolution policy that is consistent with the rules and regulations
outlined in this chapter.
   (B)   An MCS provider's complaint/inquiry resolution policy shall be reduced
in writing, and such policy shall be available upon request to any person. In
any event, a subscriber shall receive notice of such policy in the manner that
is prescribed by this chapter.
   (C)   The Council/franchising authority shall establish a neutral, third-
party appeal process to handle complaints/inquiries that are not satisfactorily
resolved at the MCS provider level.
   (D)   An MCS provider's complaint/inquiry resolution policy shall contain at
least the following minimal standards:
      (1)   The initial response to a complaint/inquiry shall occur no later
than 24 hours after receipt of the complaint/inquiry;
      (2)   Every attempt will be made to resolve the complaint/inquiry within
72 hours after receipt of the complaint/inquiry;
      (3)   Complaints/inquiries that fall into the category of service
inquiries shall abide by the procedure set forth in this chapter;
      (4)   Informing subscribers of the credit/refund policy which is
consistent with this chapter, and any applicable state regulations; and
      (5)   Informing subscribers of the billing disputes policy which is
consistent with this chapter, and any applicable state regulations.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.080 CONTINUITY OF MULTI-CHANNEL SERVICE PROVISIONS; POLICY.
   (A)   The Council/franchising authority declares that as part of its right
to establish multi-channel customer service guidelines, it has the duty to
ensure continuity of multi-channel service for all subscribers. In that light,
the Council/franchising authority also determines that it may take appropriate
measures in order to ensure that no portion of the city is threatened or faced
with a disruption, interruption, or discontinuance of multi-channel service due
to the actions of any MCS provider.
   (B)   In addition to the principles and ideals enumerated in division (A),
the Council/franchising authority also expresses that its policy covers the
following:
      (1)   To provide for continuity of multi-channel service in the event of
acquisition by the city;
      (2)   To provide for continuity of service in the event of a proposed
abandonment, withdrawal, or cessation of multi-channel service by an MCS
provider;
      (3)   To provide for continuity of service in the event of revocation,
termination, or non-renewal of a franchised MCS provider's franchise;
      (4)   To provide for continuity of service in the event that a
transaction occurs that affects the ownership or control of the MCS provider,
such as an assignment, sale, transfer, or merger;
      (5)   To provide for continuity of service in the event of an expiration
of a franchise;
      (6)   To prevent disruption of multi-channel service which would provide
a hardship on those subscribers who rely on a multi-channel system as their
primary or secondary source for information; and
      (7)   To prevent the interruption or cessation of multi-channel service
which would disrupt or eliminate the diversity of programming choices enjoyed
by subscribers of a multi-channel system, and thereby restricting their ability
to receive information.
   (C)   In any situation, including those mentioned above, which threatens the
city and subscribers with the loss or interruption in the continuity of multi-
channel service, then the MCS provider shall provide the Council/franchising
authority with at least 45 days notice (except in extreme circumstances) prior
to the effective date of any action which would cause a loss or interruption in
the continuity of multi-channel service. The purpose of the notice is to
apprise the Council/franchising authority of the possibility of such loss or
interruption in the continuity of multi-channel service so that it might
explore its options and take appropriate measures.
   (D)   Whenever any situation occurs, including those mentioned above, which
threatens the city and subscribers with the loss or interruption in the
continuity of multi-channel service, then the Council/franchising authority may
direct the MCS provider for a period of up to 24 months to do everything in its
power to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted multi-
channel service of the same quality, mix, and level(s) regardless of the
circumstances.
   (E)   During the interim period, the Council/franchising authority shall
work with the MCS provider in order to secure a new multi-channel system owner,
or rectify the problem, so that the threat of loss of continuity is removed at
the earliest possible instance.
   (F)   During any interim period in which the MCS provider continues to
provide multi-channel service to subscribers, the MCS provider is entitled to
all revenues collected, except sums owed (including franchise fees, alternative
user charges, and taxes) to the city or to other persons.
   (G)   In the event that the threat of loss of continuity is not resolved
within 24 months, then the Council/franchising authority may extend the interim
period on a month-to-month basis until the situation is satisfactorily
resolved. Also, in such a circumstance, the Council/franchising authority may
adopt any emergency rules or procedures which will ensure that the subscribers
will receive continuous, uninterrupted multi-channel service of the same
quality, mix, and level(s).
   (H)   Nothing in this section should be construed as requiring an MCS
provider to operate a multi-channel system at a continued financial loss (due
to bankruptcy or insolvency) for an extended period of time. In such case,
while the Council/franchising authority may require continuity of service, it
must lift such requirement as soon as the threat of loss of service is removed.
Consequently, the Council/franchising authority must take appropriate steps to
both ensure the continuity of service, and minimize the financial loss incurred
by the MCS provider if the abandonment, cessation, or withdrawal is caused by
bankruptcy, or insolvency.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
CONSTRUCTION; INSTALLATION; MAINTENANCE
§ 112.095 CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE AND RELATED REQUIREMENTS.
   In order to establish a minimum uniform standards, the Council/franchising
authority requires any MCS provider to adopt the following minimal construction
schedule and construction-related requirements:
   (A)   Construct, install, maintain, and repair the multi-channel system in
accordance with the requirements noted in this chapter;
   (B)   Use streets and public ways, as set forth in this chapter;
   (C)   Where applicable, remove franchise property from public streets, as
set forth in this chapter;
   (D)   Adopt the construction standards, as set forth in this chapter;
   (E)   Adopt the system expansion standards, as set forth in this chapter;
   (F)   Adopt the construction schedule as referred to in this chapter;
   (G)   Abide by, and act in strict accordance with, all current technical
codes adopted by the city, or the state, or the United States, as noted in this
chapter; and
   (H)   Maintain all permits and licenses, as noted in this chapter.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.096 CONSTRUCTION OF GOOD QUALITY.
   During any phase of construction, installation, maintenance, and repair of
the multi-channel system, the MCS provider shall use materials of good and
durable quality and all such work shall be performed in a safe, thorough, and
reliable manner.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.097 STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS; CONDITIONS ON USE.
   (A)   All wires, conduits, cable (coaxial, fiber, or functional equivalent),
and other property and facilities of an MCS provider shall be so located,
constructed, installed and maintained so as not to endanger or unnecessarily
interfere with usual and customary use, traffic and travel upon the streets,
rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the city.
   (B)   In the event an MCS provider's system creates a hazardous or unsafe
condition or an unreasonable interference with property, then at its own
expense such MCS provider shall voluntarily, or upon the request of the
Council/franchising authority remove that part of the system that creates the
hazardous condition from the subject property.
   (C)   An MCS provider shall not place equipment where it will interfere with
the rights of property owners or with gas, electric or telephone fixtures, or
with water hydrants or mains, or with wastewater lift stations, or any other
service or facility that benefits the city's or its residents' health, safety,
or welfare.
   (D)   An MCS provider, at either its own expense or that of a private
contractor, shall protect, rights of and easements, and support or temporarily
disconnect or relocate in the same street or other public way, any property of
such MCS provider when necessitated by reason of:
      (1)   Traffic conditions;
      (2)   Public safety;
      (3)   A street closing;
      (4)   Street construction or re-surfacing;
      (5)   Change or establishment of street grade;
      (6)   Installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, storm drains, lift
stations, force mains, power or signal lines; or
      (7)   An improvement, construction or repair related to the city's or its
residents' health, safety, or welfare.
   (E)   Upon 24 hours verbal or written notice, it shall be the responsibility
of an MCS provider (acting alone or in conjunction with another person) to
locate and mark or otherwise visibly indicate and alert others to the location
of its underground cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) before
employees, agents, or independent contractors of any entity install cable,
power or utility lines in the marked-off area.
   (F)   An MCS provider shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit, temporarily remove, raise or lower the cable wires to allow the
moving of the building. The expense of temporary removal shall be paid by the
person requesting it, and such MCS provider may require payment in advance. The
affected MCS provider shall be given not less than 10 days notice of a
contemplated move to arrange for temporary wire changes.
   (G)   For any new installations occurring after the effective date of this
chapter, and at the time that an MCS provider rebuilds or upgrades the multi-
channel system, all trunk or feeder cable (coaxial, fiber or functional
equivalent) shall be placed underground when and if utilities are placed
underground. Further, where both power and utilities are presently underground,
multi-channel system cable shall also be placed underground.
   (H)   It shall be the responsibility of any MCS provider to comply with the
most current FCC technical standards.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.098 DUTY TO REMOVE FRANCHISED PROPERTIES FROM THE PUBLIC STREETS.
   (A)   This section is applicable to any MCS provider required to maintain a
franchise to operate within the city.
   (B)   Whenever the following occurs, then, unless the city or another MCS
provider uses such multi-channel system under the continuity provisions
outlined in this chapter, the affected franchised MCS provider shall promptly
remove its multi-channel system property from the streets, public ways, and
private property located within the city:
      (1)   A franchised MCS provider ceases to operate all or part of the
multi-channel system for a continuous period of six months;
      (2)   A franchised MCS provider ceases and fails to construct the multi-
channel system outlined in the application, or proposal for renewal, or renewal
franchise agreement;
      (3)   The Council/franchising authority elects not to renew the franchise
pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter; or
      (4)   The franchised MCS provider's franchise is revoked pursuant to the
provisions set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   If not removed voluntarily by a franchised MCS provider, then the
Council/franchising authority may notify such franchised MCS provider that if
removal of the property is not accommodated within 180 days, or substantial
progress towards removal is not made within 120 days, then the Council/
franchising authority may direct officials or representatives of the city to
remove such franchised MCS provider's system property at that franchised MCS
provider's expense. The performance and/or construction bond, irrevocable
letter of credit, cash deposit, or full faith and credit guarantee required as
set forth in this chapter shall be available to pay for such work.
   (D)   If officials or representatives of the city remove a franchised MCS
provider's system property, and such franchised MCS provider does not claim the
property within 90 days of its removal, then the Council/franchising authority
may take whatever steps are available under state law to declare the property
surplus, and sell it, with the proceeds of such sale (if permitted by state
law) going to the city.
   (E)   When such franchised MCS provider removes its multi-channel system
property from the streets, public ways, and private property located within the
city, the franchised MCS provider shall, at its own expense, and in a manner
approved by the Council/franchising authority, replace and restore such public
or private property in as good a condition as before the work causing the
disturbance was done.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.099 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Methods of construction, installation, maintenance repair of any
multi-channel system shall comply with the most current editions of the
National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electric Code, as affects the
construction, installation, and maintenance of electrical supply and
communication lines and attachments and supports. To the extent that these are
inconsistent with other provisions of a franchise or state or local law, then
the state or local law shall apply.
   (B)   All construction, installation, maintenance, and repair shall treat
the aesthetics of the property as a priority, shall not substantially affect
the appearance of the structure, and shall not be installed on the bias across
the property or any side of a residence or other structure without the property
owner's written permission.
   (C)   All underground drops shall follow (to the greatest extent possible)
property lines, and cross property only at right angles, unless otherwise
permitted in writing by the property owner, required due to the physical
characteristics of the subsurface, or required under city, state, or federal
rules.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the MCS provider to inform the property owner
of rights secured under divisions (B) and (C) of this section prior to the MCS
provider's request for waiver of the divisions.
   (E)   For existing multi-channel system construction, installation, and
repair, the provisions of divisions (C) and (D) of this section shall apply
only at the time a scheduled upgrade or rebuild of the MCS provider's multi-
channel system is actually commenced. For newly served areas, then the
provisions of divisions (C) and (D) of this section shall apply at the time of
initial construction and/or installation.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
Cross-reference:
   Building regulations, see
Ch. 150
   Electrical Code, see §§
150.055 et seq.
§ 112.100 SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE FOR FRANCHISED MCS PROVIDERS.
   (A)   This section is applicable to any MCS provider required to maintain a
franchise to operate with the city.
   (B)   A franchised MCS provider's construction schedule for the multi-
channel system shall be detailed in the franchise agreement in a form and
format approved by the Council/franchising authority.
   (C)   A franchised MCS provider who does not abide by the system
construction schedule shall be handled in the manner allowed under either this
chapter, or where applicable, a franchise agreement.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.101 SYSTEM EXPANSION FOR MCS PROVIDERS.
   (A)   The Council/franchising authority recognizes that one of its primary
purposes in the franchising process is to ensure that the widest diversity of
programming source be available to the greatest number of city residents. The
Council/franchising authority is also cognizant that an MCS provider may have
some constitutionality protected rights with respect to when and what areas of
the city are provided service.
   (B)   In order to balance those interests, the Council/franchising authority
sets the minimum guidelines for any system expansion on the part of a
franchised MCS provider.
   (C)   A franchised MCS provider shall submit, within four months of the
effective date of this chapter, a detailed plan for multi-channel system
expansion to any area not presently served within the city. Such plan should
not be construed as a requirement for universal service, but rather as a means
for achieving the Council/franchising authority's goals, mentioned in division
(A). However, at a minimum, a franchised MCS provider shall extend multi-
channel service to any area within the city that has a density of five home or
building passings per mile, or fractional equivalent thereof, as measured from
the extremity of the system nearest the unserved area. Also, in such a case, a
newly installed subscriber shall not be assessed or apportioned the cost for
installation, except for the usual and normal connection fees paid by
subscribers.
   (D)   The detailed plan must include criteria for extending the provision of
service to isolated subscribers. For purposes of this section, isolated
subscribers means any potential customer of a franchised MCS provider who
dwells in a house more than ½ mile from the nearest franchised MCS provider
connection.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.102 PERMITS AND LICENSES.
   An MCS provider shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses
required by law, rule, regulation, or chapter, and maintain the same, in full
force and effect, for as long as required.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.103 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS; POLICY.
   (A)   The Council/franchising authority requires that the MCS provider's
construction, operation, and maintenance of the multi-channel system meet
certain threshold safety levels which are designed to protect the public and
lessen the likelihood of interruption of multi-channel service.
   (B)   Consequently, the Council/franchising authority requires an MCS
provider to adopt the following safety requirements:
      (1)   Emergency alert override activation in the manner set forth in this
chapter;
      (2)   Minimum standby power as noted in this chapter;
      (3)   The provision of signal alert technology in the manner noted in
this chapter;
      (4)   Implementing a periodic preventative maintenance program as set
forth in this chapter;
      (5)   Follow all FCC rules and regulations concerning maximum cumulative
leakage index (CLI) limits; and
      (6)   Comply with and abide by any construction, safety or fire codes, as
noted in this chapter or required by local law.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
Cross-reference:
   Building Regulations, see
Ch. 150
   Fire protection and prevention, see
Ch. 93
   Subdivision regulations, see
Ch. 154
§ 112.104 PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE PROGRAM.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of an MCS provider to devise and implement a
periodic preventative maintenance program for the multi-channel system in order
to ensure that there is no material degradation of the multi-channel system
that would affect the citizens' health, safety, and welfare, or negatively
affect the quality of multi-channel services being provided. The requirements
of this section shall be construed as augmenting and clarifying applicable FCC
regulations.
   (B)   The Council/franchising authority shall have the right of approval of
any preventive maintenance program. Within 45 days after the completion of any
preventive maintenance component test, the MCS provider shall prepare and
submit a written report (except for daily or weekly components, and tests which
may be submitted once a quarter) to the Council/franchising authority detailing
the results of the tests conducted, and all items performed or addressed during
the periodic preventive maintenance program. Although not exhaustive, the
following areas should be included in a preventive maintenance program, and
subsequent report:
      (1)   inspection and repair, if needed, of the headend;
      (2)   Inspection and repair, if needed, of the antenna tower;
      (3)   Requiring weather-proofing and protection of the antenna lead
connectors and on any other exposed fittings;
      (4)   Requiring the conducting of signal leakage tests that are in accord
with FCC requirements;
      (5)   Removal of tree roots, limbs, and branches that interfere with or
come in contact with the MCS provider's cable;
      (6)   Requiring the periodic servicing, testing, and calibration of the
MCS provider's equipment, including service vehicles and field test equipment;
      (7)   Employing a status monitoring system to identify problems or
situations in which the multi-channel system electronics are operating outside
pre-programmed parameters;
      (8)   Testing of the emergency alert system to ensure that it will
function properly during an emergency situation;
      (9)   Testing of the safety alert system or technology, if provided;
      (10)    Testing and recording of test data for all signals (audio and
video) at the headend and all system extremity points;
      (11)    Testing as required or allowed by federal law or regulation; and
      (12)    Meet all operating parameters as may be set or allowed by the
FCC, and as such may be changed or amended from time to time.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.105 CONSTRUCTION, FIRE AND SAFETY CODES.
   (A)   An MCS provider shall construct, operate, maintain, repair, remove,
replace, or restore the multi-channel system in strict compliance with all
current technical codes adopted by the Council/franchising authority, the
state, or the United States.
   B)   The codes referred to specifically include, but are not limited to,
construction, electrical, fire and safety, and zoning codes.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
Cross-reference:
   Building regulations, see
Ch. 150
   Fire protection and prevention, see
Ch. 93
   Subdivision regulations, see
Ch. 154
   Zoning Code, see
Ch. 155
§ 112.106 ALTERNATIVE USER CHARGE.
   (A)   This section is applicable to any licensed but otherwise authorized
MCS provider, and to any MCS provider who has had its franchise ruled
unconstitutional, unenforceable, or invalid. For all franchised MCS providers
the provisions concerning franchise fees shall be applicable.
   (B)   Where not specifically prohibited by federal or state law, and as an
alternative to the imposition of a franchise fee as set forth in this chapter,
the Council/franchising authority may impose, extract, and collect a charge
from an affected MCS provider for the use by such provider of the streets,
rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the city.
   (C)   The alternative user charge shall be based on the following
mathematical mode:
      (1)   Determine the present value of all public streets, rights-of-way,
easements, and public ways of the city in which are located multi-channel
system facilities and equipment of the affected MCS provider;
      (2)   Take the average percentage increase in land appraisals within the
city, as determined by the Property Appraiser for the city, for the five
preceding years;
      (3)   Take the average percentage increase for the five preceding years
and use it to determine the dollar amount of property value increase for the
remaining term of the franchise (if no franchise applicable, then use five
years);
      (4)   Add the present value to the dollar amount of property value
increase for the remaining term of the franchise (if no franchise applicable
then use five years);
      (5)   Divide the adjusted value of the remaining number of years on the
term of the franchise (if no franchise applicable then use five years);
      (6)   Multiply that figure by 5% to arrive at the annual user charge that
is to be collected from the affected MCS provider.
      (7)   For purposes of illustration only, the formula reads as follows:
      present value = dollar amount of property plus increase for remaining
term of the franchise (based on average percentage increase of land appraisals
for past years of franchise term) divide the adjusted value by the remaining
years on the term of the franchise, multiply that figure by 5% = (equals) the
annual alternative user charge.
   (D)   The Council/franchising authority adopts such an alternative user
charge in order to receive fair compensation for the affected MCS provider's
use of the public streets and public ways if such compensation cannot be
obtained by imposing a flat percentage fee on such MCS provider's annual gross
revenues. However, an affected MCS provider may agree to an alternative charge
that is based on a flat percentage of gross revenues, as long as that charge
does not exceed 5% of an affected MCS provider's annual gross revenues.
   (E)   Also, recognizing that an alternative user charge may affect a
franchised MCS provider, please note that the franchise agreement may contain
express language which details a different method or manner to handle a
situation in which franchise fees as historically calculated (as a percentage
of gross revenues) are ruled unconstitutional or unenforceable, in order to
protect and preserve the city's source of revenue and compensation for the use
of the public rights-of-way.
   (F)   It is expressly understood that a franchise fee and an alternative
user charge will not be imposed on the same MCS provider at the same time, for
the same period.
   (G)   An affected MCS provider shall at no time be charged or obligated to
pay an alternative user charge that exceeds 5% of such provider's gross
revenues (as defined by this chapter) for any particular reporting period. In
the event that the alternative user charge does exceed 5% of gross revenues,
then such alternative user charge shall be reduced to reflect an amount not
greater than the 5% cap.
   (H)   An affected MCS provider shall pay 25% of the alternative user charge
at the end of every three months.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
FRANCHISES
§ 112.120 FRANCHISE REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B), (C), and (D) of this section, no
person or MCS provider shall be permitted to construct, operate or maintain a
multi-channel system which requires the laying or positioning of cable
(coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) across the rights-of-way of the city
without having first obtained a franchise, and then entering into a franchise
agreement with the city.
   (B)   Pursuant to federal Law, a local government may own and operate a
multi-channel system classified as a cable system. Consequently, should the
Council/franchising authority directly or indirectly, through any legal means
available to the Council/franchising authority, decide to purchase, acquire,
construct, lease, control, or otherwise own a cable system within the
territorial limits of the city, then the Council/franchising authority shall
not be required to submit a proposal for or receive a franchise in order to
construct, operate, and maintain a cable system within the geographical limits
of the city.
    (C)   If, as a result of annexation subsequent to the effective date of
this chapter, a previously unfranchised MCS provider comes under the
jurisdiction of the city, then such MCS provider shall be required to obtain a
franchise and enter into a franchise agreement.
   (D)   If a MCS provider is required to obtain a franchise, then the Council/
franchising authority shall notify the MCS provider, in writing, within 30 days
of the Council/franchising authority's formal action.
   (E)   After receipt of notification, the affected person or MCS provider has
90 days to submit an application or proposal in substantially the same form and
format as required by the Council/franchising authority. Then, the MCS
provider's application will be handled as set forth by either federal, state or
local law.
   (F)   It is the intent of the city/franchising authority that as a matter of
policy all MCS provider franchises shall contain substantially similar minimum
terms and conditions. However, this shall not apply to legitimate SMATV
operators who may cross only one street or right-of-way.
   (G)   The city/franchising authority, to the extent permitted by law, shall
always have the right to grant or deny a franchise as may be deemed in the
public interest.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.121 AUTHORITY TO GRANT NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISES.
   (A)   Consistent with Section 621(a)(1) of the CCPA, codified at 47 USC 541,
the Council/franchising authority may award one or more non-exclusive multi-
channel service franchises within its geographical limits.
   (B)   A franchised MCS provider shall be selected as part of a public
proceeding and hearing which affords due process to both the city and the
applicant, and after which, if the applicant is selected as a franchised MCS
provider, then such applicant will enter into a franchise agreement with the
city, pursuant to the provisions of federal, state and local laws and
regulations.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.122 FRANCHISE AGREEMENT; MINIMAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Before the Council/franchising authority awards an applicant a
franchise to construct, operate, or maintain a multi-channel system in all or
part of the city, or approves a proposal for a renewal of a franchise, the
applicant or renewal applicant and the city shall negotiate a franchise
agreement which details the rights, duties, responsibilities, and liabilities
of both parties.
   (B)   A newly franchised MCS provider may not lay any cable (coaxial, fiber,
or functional equivalent) until the franchise agreement is executed by both the
newly franchised MCS provider and the Council/franchising authority.
   (C)   A franchise agreement shall be in sufficient detail in order to
clearly delineate the rights and duties of the franchised MCS provider and the
Council/franchising authority.
   (D)   At a minimum, a franchise agreement shall contain provisions for the
following:
      (1)   A detailed definition of annual gross revenues or gross revenues
which specifically includes an explanation of what constitutes the revenue base
for determining what revenues are subject to any franchise fee or alternative
user charge;
      (2)   The term or duration of the franchise;
      (3)   Indemnity and holds harmless clauses;
      (4)   Insurance;
      (5)   Performance and completion bonds or security deposits;
      (6)   Construction, upgrade or rebuild schedule;
      (7)   Franchise fees;
      (8)   Continuity of multi-channel programming service;
      (9)   Repeal of prior inconsistent franchise agreements;
      (10)    A severability clause;
      (11)    Any exemptions or relief from this chapter granted, or any
chapter clarifications noted with respect to the MCS provider's operation of a
franchised multi-channel system; and
      (12)    Geographical limits of the franchise.
   (E)   Regardless of the need for a franchise for any particular technology
or provider, the city/franchising authority, to the extent allowed by state or
federal law, retains the right to impose certain minimum requirements as may be
deemed in the public interest. Such minimum requirements shall specifically
include matters related to customer service standards and consumer protection
requirements as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.123 EXTENT OF GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Upon an award of a franchise and the execution of the franchise
agreement, an MCS provider required to obtain and maintain a franchise may
construct, erect, install, maintain, operate, repair, replace, remove, or
restore a multi-channel system within the geographical limits set forth in the
franchise agreement.
   (B)   The franchised multi-channel system may be located in, upon, along,
across, over, and under the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways
of the city.
   (C)   If necessary, the responsibility of obtaining easements for private
property (including privately owned utility or street light poles) shall be
that of a franchised MCS provider.
   (D)   A franchised MCS provider, through a separate pole or utility easement
agreement with an affected utility, may locate the multi-channel system on or
within the property of such utility company. This provision specifically
includes MCS providers classified as cable operators.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
 § 112.124 TERM OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   The term of an initial or renewal franchise may be for a period not to
exceed 15 years from the date that a franchise renewal agreement is approved by
the Council/franchising authority.
   (B)   If an initial franchise or renewal franchise is for a period of six
years or less, then the franchise agreement shall detail the reasons for
granting the shorter franchise term.
   (C)   The reasons for a franchise term of six years or less include, but are
not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Multiple or repeated violations of the prior franchise agreement;
      (2)   Multiple or repeated violations of this chapter, or any mandated
provisions of federal law or regulations;
      (3)   A continuing and documented pattern of substandard or non-
responsive service;
      (4)   Reckless disregard for the safety and welfare of the citizens of
the city;
      (5)   Failure to comply with any construction, rebuild, or upgrade
schedule;
      (6)   Failure to timely pay in their entirety any franchise fees, taxes,
or other charges due to the city; and
      (7)   Refusal to increase channel capacity and service to the level
offered by any other MCS provider within a 100 mile radius of the city.
   (D)   The Council/franchising authority reserves the right to grant a
franchised MCS provider a variable franchise term, wherein the initial or
renewal term may be extended by up to three years, not to exceed 15 years
total, upon the franchised MCS provider attaining an excellent rating during
the course of a periodic performance evaluation.
   (E)   Should the highest court of the nation or state invalidate or void as
unenforceable or unconstitutional the concept of a franchise or franchise
duration, then the Council/franchising authority may adopt emergency rules and
regulations in order to preserve and protect the rights and duties of both the
Council/franchising authority and any franchised MCS provider. During the
interim, the invalid franchise may be considered (unless prohibited by the
state) and interpreted in the same manner and fashion as a business license.
Upon the adoption of emergency rules, the Council/franchising authority should
enter into a new agreement which describes under which terms and conditions of
the franchised MCS provider's system may be reviewed and examined, and under
what circumstances may a franchised MCS provider forfeit its right to operate a
multi-channel system within all or part of the city.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.125 APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE; APPLICATION FEE.
   (A)   The Council/franchising authority may develop rules and regulations
with respect to the submission and processing of applications for an initial
franchise. Such rules and regulations shall primarily be aimed at determining
the legal, financial, technical, and character qualifications of the applicant.
   (B)   Unless prohibited, an initial applicant shall pay an application fee
which shall be equal to the administrative and consulting costs associated with
processing an application for a franchise. The total application fee must be
paid, unless waived, regardless of whether the applicant receives or does not
receive a franchise. The total application fee must be paid (or waived) prior
to the Council/franchising authority's formal action on the applicant's request
for a franchise.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.126 FRANCHISE FEES.
   (A)   Any franchised MCS provider (specifically including any MCS provider
classified as a cable operator) awarded a franchise or renewal franchise after
the date this chapter becomes effective shall pay to the city for the privilege
and use of the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways, and other
facilities of the city in the operation of the multi-channel system, and for
the city's supervision thereof during the term of the franchise, a sum of up to
5% of the annual gross revenues of such non-exempt franchised MCS provider.
   (B)   If the FCC, Congress or other governmental entity with authority over
multi-channel service ever allows a governmental entity or Council/franchising
authority to increase the franchise fee beyond 5%, then the Council/franchising
authority shall have the authority to increase the franchise fee to the maximum
rate allowable.
   (C)   It is intended that the franchise fees will promote the health,
safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. Therefore, the 5% franchise
fee shall be deposited into the general revenue of the city, unless
specifically authorized elsewhere.
   (D)   A franchised MCS provider shall file with the Council/franchising
authority, within 60 days after the expiration of each of the franchised MCS
provider's fiscal quarters, a detailed financial and revenue statement clearly
showing the gross revenues received by such franchised MCS provider during the
preceding quarter and certified by a certified public accountant or officer of
a franchised MCS provider attesting to the accuracy, completeness, and veracity
of the revenue figures. Such statement shall be in the form and format
determined by the Council/franchising authority. Such statement shall include
revenue from whatever source, directly or indirectly derived from, or allowed,
or caused to be derived from, or applicable to the operation of the multi-
channel system, or the provision of any multi-channel service by or to the
multi-channel system, for those revenues and revenue sources applicable to or
affecting the franchise fee or the computational base for the franchise fee.
Revenue will be reported by service category, type, and level showing
computations and using incremental billing rates for all sources, levels,
tiers, and types of service and other revenue sources of all kinds and types.
   (E)   Payment of the quarterly portion of the franchise fee shall be
rendered to the city at the time the financial and revenue statement is filed.
   (F)   In the event that full payment is not made within 45 days after the
date specified in this section, then such franchised MCS provider may be
declared in default of the franchise, and the franchise may be revoked,
terminated, or canceled in the manner prescribed by this chapter.
   (G)   The Council/franchising authority reserves the right to audit a
franchised MCS provider's books, if the Council/franchising authority deems it
necessary. If such audit discovers an underpayment of franchise fees that
exceeds 1% of the total fee paid for any reporting quarter, then the affected
franchised MCS provider shall reimburse the city for the cost of such an audit.
It is specifically understood that the right of audit and re-computation of any
and all amounts paid under a franchise fee shall always be accorded to the
Council/franchising authority. It is further understood that the Council/
franchising authority shall be bound by the result of any audit it performs or
causes to be performed, except for instances involving fraud.
   (H)   If an audit or other research discovers that franchise fees have been
either underpaid or not paid for a period exceeding six months from the
original due date, then the city may seek full recovery of the underpaid or
non-paid fees plus interest not to exceed 15% or the maximum allowable under
state law (whichever is less). The audit may cover a period not to exceed 48
months prior to the date of audit and the MCS provider is required to retain
its books and records for all periods subject to audit.
   (I)   All annual reports due and pertaining to the payment of franchise fees
will be certified by an officer of the franchised MCS provider, and such
provider shall maintain records used in the preparation of the report to be
produced in their originality and totality upon request or demand by the
Council/franchising authority.
   (J)   No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release of, or an
accord, or satisfaction of any claim that the city might have for further or
additional sums payable under the terms of this chapter, or for any other
performance or obligation of a franchised MCS provider hereunder.
   (K)   Payments of compensation made by a franchised MCS provider to the
city, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be considered in
addition to and exclusive of any and all authorized taxes, business license
fees, other fees, other levies or assessments presently in effect, or
subsequently adopted.
   (L)   A franchise fee does not include any items specifically excluded by
federal law.
   (M)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the Council/franchising authority to impose a tax, fee or other assessment of
any kind, on any person (other than a franchised MCS provider) with respect to
multi-channel service or other programming or communications service provided
by such person over a multi-channel system for which charges are assessed to
subscribers, but not received by a franchised MCS provider. For purposes of
illustration only, this division shall include the situation(s) where a premium
service directly bills a subscriber, or the franchised MCS provider merely acts
as collection agent for a premium service billing directly to a subscriber, or
where a person leases a channel for commercial use and sells advertising or
goods on that channel, and receives the money directly or through a third
party.
   (N)   For any 12 month period, the fees paid by any person subject to
division (M) who provides any such multi-channel service shall not exceed 5% of
such person's gross revenues derived in such period from the provision of such
service over the multi-channel system, or the maximum allowed by law at any
time.
   (O)   If, at any time, the highest court of the nation or the state
invalidates, voids, or rules as unconstitutional the concept of franchise fees,
then the Council/franchising authority may impose an alternative user charge on
the franchised MCS provider in the manner set forth in this chapter.
   (P)   In light of division (O) of this section, and recognizing that an
alternative user charge may affect a franchised MCS provider, please note that
the franchise agreement may contain express language which details a different
method or manner for collection of franchise fees should the way they
historically have been calculated (as a percentage of gross revenues) be ruled
unconstitutional or unenforceable, so that the city's source of revenue and
compensation for the use of the public right-of-way may be protected.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.127 ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Where required for operation, an MCS provider's franchise may not be
assigned or transferred in whole or in part by the affected MCS provider
without the prior express written approval by the Council/franchising
authority.
   (B)   Any attempted assignment or transfer without such prior written
consent shall constitute a default of such franchise.
   (C)   In the event of such a default, the Council/franchising authority
shall proceed according to the procedure set forth in this chapter, and any
applicable federal or state law.
   (D)   At least 90 days before a proposed assignment or transfer of an MCS
provider's franchise is scheduled to become effective, such franchised MCS
provider shall petition in writing for the Council/franchising authority's
written consent for such a proposed assignment or transfer.
   (E)   The Council/franchising authority will not unreasonably withhold its
consent to such an assignment or transfer. However, in making such a
determination, the Council/franchising authority may consider the following:
      (1)   Experience of proposed assignee or transferee, including conducting
an investigation of proposed assignee or transferee's service records in other
communities;
      (2)   Qualifications of proposed assignee or transferee;
      (3)   Legal integrity of proposed assignee or transferee;
      (4)   Financial ability and stability of the proposed assignee or
transferee;
      (5)   If requested by the Council/franchising authority, submittals from
the proposed assignee or transferee on what, if any, changes it intends to make
in the operation and maintenance of the present multi-channel system;
      (6)   The corporate connection, if any, between the franchised MCS
provider and proposed assignee or transferee;
      (7)   The economic viability or non-viability of the multi-channel system
in the future, based upon certain factors including the impact of the purchase
price on the city and/or the proposed assignee or transferee; and
      (8)   Any other legitimate aspect of the proposed assignee's or
transferee's background which could affect the health, safety, and welfare of
the citizenry of the city as it relates to the operation of the multi-channel
system.
   (F)   Unless disclosure is demonstrated by the MCS provider to be
specifically prohibited by law, a copy of the completed sales agreement or a
functionally equivalent instrument between the franchised MCS provider and
proposed assignee or transferee shall be provided to the Council/franchising
authority so that the Council/franchising authority may discover the assumption
of obligations by the franchised MCS provider and proposed assignee or
transferee with respect to the multi-channel system. In lieu of the sales
agreement, the Council/franchising authority may, by prior written agreement,
accept an attested summary of obligations assumed by the above-referenced
parties.
   (G)   Before an assignment or transfer is approved by the Council/
franchising authority, the proposed assignee or transferee shall execute an
affidavit acknowledging that it has read, understood, and intends to abide by
both this chapter and the applicable franchise agreement.
   (H)   In the event of any approved assignment or transfer, the assignee or
transferee shall assume all obligations and liabilities of the former
franchised MCS provider, except as noted in division (I).
   (I)   An assignment or transfer shall not relieve the former franchised MCS
provider of its liabilities under the franchise agreement until the assignment
actually takes place, or unless specifically relieved by the Council/
franchising authority at the time an assignment or transfer is approved.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.128 DEFAULT OF FRANCHISE; REVOCATION, TERMINATION OR CANCELLATION OF
FRANCHISE.
   (A)   When any event, act or omission on the part of the franchised MCS
provider occurs which represents a violation of a material provision of this
chapter, or compromises the corporate character, or legal, financial or
technical integrity and/or stability of the multi-channel system or the
franchise MCS provider to such a degree that the interests of the subscribers
and users are negatively affected, then such event, act or omission may be
considered a major breach of this chapter. Under such circumstances, the
Council/franchising authority shall notify the affected MCS provider in writing
of the specific breach and direct such franchised MCS provider to comply with
all such provisions of its proposal, franchise agreement, or this chapter.
   (B)   For illustrative purposes only, the events, acts and omissions
include, but are not limited to, bankruptcy, insolvency, failure to pay taxes
or franchise fees (including the alternative user charge if applicable),
failure to receive written Council/franchising authority approval for an
assignment or transfer, demonstrating a repeated pattern or practice of
conscious disregard for non-material provisions of this chapter or a franchise
agreement or failure to abide by the material terms and conditions of the
franchise agreement, or material provisions of this chapter. For purposes of
this section, “material” means a provision which either affects the ability of
the customer to receive multi-channel service or affects the ability of the
Council/franchising authority to evaluate an MCS provider's performance in the
technical, financial, and legal aspects of the multi-channel system.
   (C)   Where a franchise MCS provider satisfactorily corrects any of the
enumerated conditions within 45 days, then in no event shall the enumerated
condition be weighed against such franchised MCS provider in any subsequent
review of franchise performance.
   (D)   A copy of such notice of material breach or other conditions which may
compel default, revocation, termination or cancellation of a franchise shall be
mailed to the surety on the performance bond.
   (E)   Within 75 days after such written notice is mailed to a franchised MCS
provider, the Council/franchising authority shall conduct a public hearing on
the matter, unless state law requires a different procedure, in which the state
procedure would control.
   (F)   The Council/franchising authority shall provide written notice to a
franchised MCS provider and the surety of the time and place of the public
hearing in a manner consistent with either state law or approved by the
Council/franchising authority.
   (G)   At the time of the hearing, the affected franchised MCS provider may
present information on the current status of the alleged breach of the
franchise agreement. If the situation has been resolved, or steps are being
taken to resolve the situation, the franchised MCS provider should present the
information at the hearing.
   (H)   If the affected franchised MCS provider fails to attend the hearing,
and has not requested and been granted a continuance of the hearing, then such
franchised MCS provider shall be deemed to have waived its right to a further
continuation of the matter, and may be declared in default of the franchise
agreement.
   (I)   After the public hearing, the Council/franchising authority may
determine the franchised MCS provider to be in compliance and dismiss the
matter, or may determine that the MCS provider has cured any non-compliance and
thereby dismiss the matter. However, the Council/franchising authority may
determine that an chapter violation exists and remains uncured. Consequently,
upon a finding that the MCS provider violated an material chapter provision, or
failed to cure an outstanding chapter violation, the Council/franchising
authority may direct the affected franchised MCS provider to take corrective
action within a specified period of time, or may declare such franchised MCS
provider in default of the franchise agreement, and thereafter, may revoke,
terminate, or cancel the franchise, unless the franchised MCS provider presents
in the opinion of the Council/franchising authority sufficient mitigating
circumstances.
   (J)   If the Council/franchising authority directs corrective action to take
place within a specified time or declares such franchised MCS provider in
default of the franchise agreement, then that declara-tion shall be reduced in
writing, and the notice of corrective action or default shall be mailed to such
franchised MCS provider and surety within 15 days of the Council/franchising
authority's action.
   (K)   If within 45 days the affected franchised MCS provider or surety does
not take significant action to rectify the breach or submit a satisfactory plan
detailing how the affected MCS provider will eliminate the breach, then the
Council/franchising authority shall revoke such MCS provider's franchise, and
shall notify the affected franchised MCS provider and surety forthwith, unless
there are mitigating circumstances.
   (L)   The Council/franchising authority reserves the right to assess any
charges incurred (including costs for consultants, witnesses, and hearing
preparation) in a default and/or revocation proceeding to the franchised MCS
provider.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.129 PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS.
   The Council/franchising authority is authorized to design a performance
evaluation procedure which periodically monitors compliance of the franchised
MCS provider with the terms and conditions of both the franchise and this
chapter. Moreover, the Council/franchising authority may periodically review
and examine whether a franchised MCS provider's financial, technical, legal,
and character qualifications continue to meet required operational,
maintenance, and performance levels in order to ensure that community needs are
identified and met and the uninterrupted provision of state of the art multi-
channel service is performed. Such performance evaluations may be conducted
biannually during the franchise term, and may be done as part of any required
survey.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
CABLE OPERATORS
§ 112.145 REGULATORY PROVISIONS FOR CABLE OPERATORS.
   (A)   Notification of proposed rate increase.
      (1)   A cable operator shall provide written notice to a subscriber of
any increase in the price to be charged for the basic service tier or
associated equipment at least 30 days before any proposed increase is
effective. The notice shall include a provision stating that protests to such
prices may be filed with the city at P. O. Box 657, Cleburne, Texas, 76033. The
notice shall also include a statement that such protests must be filed with the
city no later than 30 days after the notice is received by the subscriber.
      (2)   In addition to the notice required in subdivision (A)(1), the cable
operator shall give the city a minimum of 30 days advance written notification
of any changes in rates for cable programming service or associated equipment.
   (B)   Initiation of review of basic cable service and equipment rates. A
cable operator shall file its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and
associated equipment with the city within 30 day of receiving written
notification from the city that the city has been certified by the Commission
to regulate rates for the basic service tier, or by November 15th, 1993,
whichever is later.
   (C)   City review of basic cable rates and equipment costs.
      (1)   After a cable operator has submitted to the city for review its
existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment costs, or a
proposed increase in these rates (including increases in the baseline channel
charge that results from reductions in the number of channels in a tier), the
existing rates will remain in effect or the proposed rates will become
effective after 30 days from the date of submission to the city. Provided,
however, that the city may toll this 30-day deadline for an additional time by
issuing a brief written order as described in division (C)(4) within 30 days of
the rate submission explaining that it needs additional time to review the
rates. The city may, at any time, require the cable operator to produce
additional information, including proprietary information, that the city deems
necessary in order to make a rate determination. If proprietary information is
provided, the provisions of division (D) of this section will apply to such
information.
      (2)   Upon receipt by the city, the cable operator's submittal shall be
available for public inspection and copying. Comments on the submittal by
interested persons may be submitted in writing or orally at a city Council
meeting held at any time during the initial 30-day review period. Written
comments shall be addressed to the City Manager and must be received prior to
the end of the 30-day review period.
      (3)   If a cable operator submits a proposed rate increase for review
that appears to exceed the presumptively reasonable level and does not include
a cost-of-service showing to justify the rate, the city will permit the cable
operator to cure this deficiency and submit a cost-of-service showing to
justify the rate.
      (4)   (a)   If the city is unable to determine, based upon the material
submitted by the cable operator, that the existing or proposed rates are within
the permitted basic service tier charge or actual cost of equipment as defined
in this chapter, or if a cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing
pursuant to this chapter seeking to justify a rate above the basic service tier
charges as defined in this chapter, the city may toll the 30-day deadline in
Subdivision (C)(1) of this section to request and/or consider additional
information or to consider the comments from interested parties as follows:
            1.   For an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of-
service showings; or
            2.   For an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service
showings.
         (b)   The order tolling the effective date of the proposed rate shall
explain why the city could not make the necessary determination, and it shall
also provide the cable operator an opportunity to cure any deficiencies in its
original filing. During the additional time periods provided in this division,
comments from interested persons may be submitted in writing, as provided in
subdivision (C)(2) of this section, or orally during at least one city Council
meeting during the period of abatement.
      (5)   If the city has availed itself of the additional 90 or 150 days
permitted in Subdivision (C)(3) of this section, and has taken no action within
these additional time periods, then the proposed rates will go into effect at
the end of the 90 or 150 day periods, or existing rates will remain in effect
at such times, subject to refunds if the city subsequently issues a written
decision disapproving any portion of such rates. Provided, however, that in
order to order refunds, the city must have issued a brief written order to the
cable operator by the end of the 90 or 150 day period permitted in Subdivision
(C)(3) of this section directing the operator to keep an accurate account of
all amounts received by reason of the rate in issue and on whose behalf such
amounts were paid.
   (D)   Proprietary information.
      (1)   If the city has required the cable operator to produce proprietary
information under the provisions of this chapter, the cable operator may submit
therewith a request that such information not be made routinely available for
public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to an shall cover
all of the materials to which it applies and all copies of those materials. If
feasible, the materials to which the request applies shall be physically
separated from any materials to which the request does not apply. If this is
not feasible, the portion of the materials to which the request applies shall
be identified.
      (2)   Each such request shall contain a statement of the reasons for
withholding the materials from inspection and of the facts upon which those
reasons are based. If the request is that the materials be withheld from
inspection for a limited period of time, that period shall be specified.
      (3)   Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of
Subdivisions (D)(1) and (2) of this section will not be considered.
      (4)   Upon receipt of a request in compliance with Subdivisions (D)(1)
and (2), the city will not grant routine public access to the materials. A
letter to that effect will be placed in a public file in lieu of the materials
withheld from public inspection.
      (5)   Provided, however, if a written request for the materials is
received by the city pursuant to the Open Records Act, Tex. Gov't Code §§
552.001 et seq., the city will notify the person providing the materials of the
request for the materials. If the person providing the materials requests the
city to do so, the city will request an opinion from the Attorney General,
pursuant to the Open Records Act, regarding the public availability of the
materials. If the person providing the materials does not request the city to
request an opinion from the Attorney General, the city may, at is option,
either request such an opinion or provide the materials to the public.
      (6)   If the Attorney General issues an opinion or letter ruling
requiring the city to make the materials available to the public, the materials
will be made available for public inspection.
      (7)   If no request for confidentiality is submitted, the city assumes no
obligation to consider the need for non-disclosure.
   (E)   Burden of proof.
      (1)   A cable operator has the burden of providing that its existing or
proposed rates for basic service and associated equipment comply with federal
regulations and this chapter.
      (2)   For an existing or proposed rate for basic service tier or
associated equipment that is within the permitted tier charge and actual cost
of equipment as set forth in this chapter, the cable operator must submit the
appropriate FCC form to the city.
      (3)   For an existing or a proposed rate for basic service tier that
exceeds the permitted tier charge as set forth in this chapter, the cable
operator must submit to the city a cost-of-service showing to justify the
proposed rates. The cost-of-service showing must in conformance with Accounting
and Cost Allocation Requirements as adopted and amended by the Commission for
cable system operators.
   (F)   Written decision.
      (1)   The city shall issue a written decision in a ratemaking proceeding
whenever it disapproves an initial rate for the basic service tier or
associated equipment in whole or in part, disapproves a request for a rate
increase in whole or in part, or approves a request for an increase in whole or
in part over the objections of interested parties. The city is not required to
issue a written decision that approves an unopposed existing or proposed rate
for the basic service tier or associated equipment.
      (2)   Public notice shall be given of any written decision required in
Subdivision (F)(1) of this section by making the text of any written decision
available to the public, and by publication of the decision one time in the
official newspaper of the city.
   (G)   Reduction of rates; prescription of rates.
      (1)   The city may order a cable operator to implement a prospective
reduction in basic service tier or associated equipment rates where necessary
to bring rates into compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter.
      (2)   The city may prescribe a reasonable rate for the basic service tier
or associated equipment after it determines that a proposed rate is
unreasonable.
   (H)   Refunds.
      (1)   The city may order a cable operator to refund to subscribers that
portion of previously paid rates determined by the city to be in excess of the
permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment, unless the
operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing which justifies the rate
charges as reasonable. Before ordering a cable operator to refund previously
paid rates to subscribers, the city shall given the operator notice and
opportunity to comment. The operator's opportunity to comment upon the proposed
refunds may be at any meeting of the City Council during the city's period of
review of the operator's rates. If the city has extended its review period, and
has issued an accounting order, then the operator, prior to refunds being
ordered, may request an opportunity to appear before the City Council to
comment upon the proposed refunds.
      (2)   An operator's liability for refunds is limited to a one-year
period, except that an operator that fails to comply with a valid rate order
issued by the city shall be liable for refunds commencing from the effective
date of such order until such time as it complies with such order.
      (3)   The refund portion shall run as follows:
         (a)   From the date the operator implements a prospective rate
reduction back in time to September 1, 1993, or one year, whichever is shorter.
         (b)   From the date the city issues an accounting order, and ending on
the date the operator implements a prospective rate reduction ordered by the
city or one year, whichever is shorter.
      (4)   The cable operator, in its discretion, may implement a refund in
the following manner:
         (a)   By returning overcharges to those subscribers who actually paid
the overcharges, either through direct payment or as specifically identified
credit to those subscribers' bills; or
         (b)   By means of a prospective percentage reduction in the rates for
the basic service tier or associated equipment to cover the cumulative
overcharge. This shall be reflected as a specifically identified, one-time
credit on prospective bills to the class of subscribers that currently
subscribe to the cable system.
      (5)   Refunds shall include interest computed at applicable rates
published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and additional tax
payments.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.146 MCS PROVIDERS CLASSIFIED AS CABLE OPERATORS; ADDITIONAL RULES.
   (A)   Generally. In addition to any requirements contained within this
chapter, all MCS providers that are classified as cable operators shall be
expected to abide by and comply with all applicable provisions of the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection
Act of 1992. A cable operator must provide the following information to
subscribers on monthly bills:
      (1)   A statement substantially the same as the following: “The basic
service tier rates and related equipment and installation charges are regulated
by the city. If you have any questions or comments regarding these rates, you
may call or write the city at P. O. Box 657, Cleburne, Texas 76033 (817) 645-
0901”; and
      (2)   The FCC community unit identifier for the cable system.
   (B)   Rates for the basic service tier.
      (1)   Basic service tier rates. Basic service tier rates are subject to
regulation by the city in order to assure that they are in compliance with the
requirements of 47 USC 543. Rates that are demonstrated, in accordance with
this chapter, not to exceed the Initial Permitted Per Channel Charge or the
Subsequent Permitted Per Channel Charge as described below, or the equipment
charges as specified in this chapter, will be accepted as in compliance. The
maximum monthly charge per subscriber for the basic service tier offered by a
cable operator shall consist of a permitted per channel charge multiplied by
the number of channels on the tier, plus a charge for franchise fees. The
maximum monthly charges for the basic service tier shall not include any
charges for equipment or installations. Charges for equipment and installations
are to be calculated separately pursuant to this chapter.
      (2)   Initial Permitted Per Channel Charge.
         (a)   For purposes of this section, the initial date of regulation for
the basic service tier shall be the date on which the city gives written notice
to the cable operator that the city has been certified by the Commission to
regulate rates for the basic service tier and that this chapter has been
adopted by the city.
         (b)   For purposes of this section, rates in effect on the initial
date of regulation or in effect on September 30, 1992, shall be the rates
charged to subscribers for service received on that respective date.
          (c)   The permitted channel charge on the initial date of regulation
shall be, at the election of the cable operator, either:
            1.   A charge determined pursuant to a cost-of-service proceeding;
or
            2.   The charge specified in subdivisions a., b. or c. of this
subdivision, as applicable.
               a.   If the operator's per channel charge for the basic service
tier and equipment is equal to or below the benchmark per channel charge, as
adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the date of initial
regulation, then the permitted per channel charge shall be the per channel
charge in effect on the date of initial regulation, adjusted for equipment.
               b.   If the operator's channel charge for the basic service tier
and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation is above the
benchmark per channel charge, as adjusted forward for inflation from September
30, 1992, until the initial date of regulation, and the operator's per channel
charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on September 30,
1992, was above the benchmark per channel charge is nine-tenths of the per
channel charge in effect on September 30, 1992, but no lower than the benchmark
per channel charge, additionally adjusted for inflation from September 30,
1992, to the initial date of regulation, for equipment, and for any changes in
the number of channels offered on the basic service tiers.
               c.   If the operator's per channel charge for the basic service
tier and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation is above the
benchmark per channel charge, as adjusted forward for inflation from September
30, 1992, until the initial date of regulation, and the operator's per channel
charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on September 30,
1992, was below the benchmark per channel charge, then the permitted per
channel charge is the benchmark rate per channel adjusted for inflation from
September 30, 1992, to the initial date of regulation, for equipment, and for
any changes in the number of channels offered on the basic service tier.
      (3)   Subsequent Permitted Per Channel Charge. After the initial date of
regulation, the permitted channel charge for the basic service tier shall be,
at the election of the cable operator, either:
         (a)   A per channel rate determined pursuant to a cost-of-service
showing, or;
         (b)   The prior permitted per channel charge previously approved by
the city, adjusted for inflation and external costs in accordance with the
price cap requirements set forth in division (B)(4) of this section.
      (4)   Price cap requirements.
         (a)   Inflation adjustments. Permitted per channel charges for the
basic service tier may be adjusted periodically on account of inflation.
Adjustments permitted per channel charges on account of inflation shall be
based on changes in the Gross National Product Price Index (GNP-PI) published
by the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the United States Department of Commerce.
         (b)   External costs. Permitted per channel charges for the basic
service tier may also be adjusted for changes in external costs measured on a
per channel per subscriber basis. To the extent external cost increases are
greater or less than the GNP-PI for the relevant period, the per channel charge
will be adjusted accordingly. Per channel charges may not be increased if
external costs other than franchise fees increase at a rate less than
inflation. Permitted per channel charges also shall be decreased on account of
external costs to the extent of such costs decrease from previous levels.
            1.   Categories. External costs shall consist of costs in the
following categories:
               a.   State and local taxes applicable to provision of cable
television service;
               b.   Franchise fees;
               c.   Costs of complying with franchise requirements, including
costs of providing public, educational, and governmental access channels as
required by the city. However, such costs shall not include the initial cost of
providing facilities and equipment required but not heretofore provided under a
Cable TV franchise in effect prior to the adoption of this chapter.
               d.   Retransmission consent fees; and
               e.   Programming costs.
            2.   The permitted per channel charge for the basic service tier
shall be adjusted on account of programming costs and retransmission consent
fees only for programming or broadcast signals offered on that tier.
            3.   The permitted per channel charge shall not be adjusted for
costs of retransmission consent fees or charges in those fees incurred prior to
October 6, 1994.
            4.   The starting date for adjustments on account of external costs
for the basic service tier shall be the initial date of regulation for 180 days
from September 1, 1993, if the initial date of regulation occurs on or after
180 days from September 1, 1993.
            5.   Changes in franchise fees shall not result in an adjustment to
permitted per channel charges, but rather shall be calculated separately as
part of the maximum monthly charge per subscriber for the basic service tier.
            6.   Adjustments to permitted per channel charges on account of
increases in costs of programming obtained from affiliated programmers shall be
the lesser of actual increases or the previous permitted rate level increased
by the amount of inflation.
            7.   Adjustments to permitted per channel charges on account of
increases in costs of programming shall be further adjusted to reflect any
revenues received by the operator from the programmer.
   (C)   Rates for equipment and installation used to receive the basic service
tier.
      (1)   Scope.
         (a)   The equipment regulated under this section consists of all
equipment in a subscriber's location that is used to receive the basic service
tier, regardless of whether such equipment is additionally used to receive
other tiers or regulated programming service and/or unregulated service. Such
equipment shall include, but is not limited to:
            1.   Converter boxes;
            2.   Remote control units;
            3.   Connections for additional television receivers; and
            4.   Other cable home wiring.
         (b)   Subscriber charges for such equipment shall not exceed charges
based on actual costs in accordance with the requirements set forth below.
      (2)   Unbundling. A cable operator shall establish rates for remote
control units, converter boxes, other customer equipment, installation, and
additional connections separate from rates for basic service tier. In addition,
the rates for such equipment and installations shall be unbundled one from the
other.
      (3)   Equipment basket. A cable operator shall establish an Equipment
Basket, which will include all costs associated with providing customer
equipment and installation under this section. Equipment Basket costs shall be
limited to the direct and indirect material and labor costs of providing,
leasing, installing, repairing, and servicing customer equipment, as determined
in accordance with the cost account and cost allocation requirements of this
chapter. The Equipment Basket shall not include general administrative overhead
including general marketing expenses. The Equipment Basket may include a
reasonable profit.
       (4)   Hourly service charge. A cable operator shall establish charges
for equipment and installation using the Hourly Service Charge (HSC)
methodology. The HSC shall equal the operator's annual Equipment Basket costs,
excluding the purchase costs of customer equipment, divided by the total person
hours involved in installing, repairing and servicing customer equipment during
the same period. The purchase of customer equipment shall include the cable
operator's invoice price plus all other costs incurred with respect to the
equipment until the time it is provided to the customer. The HSC is calculated
according to the following formula:
         HSC =  EB - CE
             H
      Where   EB = annual Equipment Basket Cost;
            CE = annual purchase cost of all customer equipment; and
            H = person hours involved in installing and repairing equipment per
year.
      (5)   Installation charges. Installation charges shall be either:
         (a)   The HSC multiplied by the actual time spent on each individual
installation; or
         (b)   The HSC multiplied by the average time spent on a specific type
of installation.
      (6)   Remote charges. Monthly charges for rental of a remote control unit
shall consist of the average annual unit purchase cost of the type of remote
leased, including acquisition price and incidental costs such as sales tax,
financing and storage up to the time it is provided to the customer, added to
the product of the HSC times the average number of hours annually repairing or
servicing a remote, divided by 12 to determine the monthly lease rate for a
remote according to the following formula:
         Monthly =  UCE + (HSC x HR)
         Charge    12
      Where   HR = average hours repair per year; and
            UCE = average annual unit cost of remote.
      Separate charges shall be established for each significantly different
type of remote control unit.
      (7)   Other equipment charges. The monthly charge for rental of converter
boxes and other customer equipment shall be calculated in the same manner as
for remote control units. Separate charges shall be established for each
significantly different type of converter box and each significantly different
type of other customer equipment.
      (8)   Additional connection charges. The costs of installation and
monthly use of additional connections shall be recovered as charges associated
with the installation and equipment cost categories, and at rate levels
determined by the actual cost methodology presented in the foregoing divisions
of this section. An operator may recover additional programming costs and the
costs of signal boosters on the customers premises, if any, associated with the
additional connection as a separate monthly unbundled charge for additional
connections.
      (9)   Charges for equipment sold. A cable operator may sell customer
premises equipment to a subscriber. The equipment price shall recover the
operator's cost of the equipment, including costs associated with storing and
preparing the equipment for sale up to the time it is sold to the customer,
plus a reasonable profit. An operator may sell service contracts for the
maintenance and repair of equipment sold to subscribers. The charge for a
service contract shall be the HSC times the estimated average number of hours
for maintenance and repair over the life of the equipment.
      (10)    Promotions. A cable operator may offer equipment or installation
at charges below those determined under subdivisions (C)(5) through (7) of this
section, as long as those offerings are reasonable in scope in relation to the
operator's overall offerings in the Equipment Basket and not unreasonably
discriminatory. Operators may not recover the cost of a promotional offering by
increasing charges for other Equipment Basket elements, or by increasing
programming service rates above the maximum monthly charge per subscriber
prescribed by this chapter. As part of a general cost-of-service showing, an
operator may include the cost of promotions in its general system overhead
costs.
      (11)    Franchise fees. Equipment charges may include a properly
allocated portion of franchise fees paid to the city.
   (D)   Cost accounting and cost allocation requirements.
      (1)   Applicability. The requirements of this section are applicable for
purposes of rate adjustments on accounts of external costs for cost-of-service
showings.
      (2)   Generally accepted accounting principles. Cable operators shall
maintain their accounts in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles, except as otherwise directed in writing by the city.
      (3)   Accounts required. Cable operators shall maintain accounts in a
manner that will enable identification of appropriate costs and application of
the city's cost assignment and allocation procedures, to cost categories
necessary for rate adjustments due to changes in external costs and for cost-
of-service showings. Such categories shall be sufficiently detailed and
supported to permit verification and audit against the company's accounting
records.
      (4)   Accounting level. Except to the extent indicated below, cable
operators shall aggregate expenses and revenues at either the franchise,
system, regional, or company level in a manner consistent with practices of the
operator as of April 3, 1992. However, in all events, cable operators shall
identify at the franchise level their costs of franchise requirements,
franchise fees, local taxes, and local programming and shall maintain all
records as required by §
112.022.
      (5)   Cost allocation requirements.
         (a)   For purposes of establishing expenses at the franchise level,
cable operators shall allocate expenses and revenues aggregated at higher
levels to the franchise level based on the ratio of the total number of
subscribers served at the franchise level to the total number of subscribers
served at the higher level.
         (b)   Except to the extent indicated below, all categories of costs
allocated to, or identified at, the franchise level shall be allocated to the
basic service tier based on the ratio of channels in the basic tier to the
total number of channels offered in the franchise area, including nonregulated
and leased commercial access channels. These costs shall be allocated to each
tier of cable programming services based on the ratio of channels in that tier
to the total number of channels offered in the franchise area.
         (c)   Costs of programming and retransmission consent fees, however,
shall be allocated only to the tier on which the programming or broadcast
signal at issue is offered.
         (d)   Costs of franchise fees shall be allocated among equipment and
installations, program service tiers and subscribers in a manner that is most
consistent with the methodology of assessment of franchise fees by the city.
         (e)   Costs of public, educational, and governmental access channels
carried on the basic tier shall be directly assigned to the basic tier where
possible.
      (6)   Common costs. Expenses which cannot be assigned to any single
expense or service category shall be described as common costs. Common costs
shall be allocated to expense categories as follows:
         (a)   Wherever possible, common costs are to be allocated to service
cost categories based on direct analysis of the origin of the costs themselves.
         (b)   When direct analysis is not possible, common costs shall, if
possible, be allocated to service cost categories based on an indirect, cost-
causative linkage to other costs directly assigned or allocated to the service
cost category.
         (c)   When neither direct nor indirect measures of cost allocation can
be found, common costs shall be allocated to each service cost category based
on the ratio of all costs directly assigned and attributed to a service cost
category over total costs directly assignable and attributable.
      (7)   Unrelated expenses and revenues. Cable operators shall exclude from
cost categories used to develop rates for the provision of basic service tier
and equipment, any direct or indirect expenses and revenues not related to the
provision of such services. Common costs of providing basic service tier and
equipment, and unrelated activities shall be allocated between them in
accordance with Subdivision (D)(6) of this section.
      (8)   Part-time channels. In situations where a single channel is divided
on a part-time basis and is used to deliver service associated with different
tiers or with pay-per-channel or pay-per-view service, a reasonable and
documented allocation of that channel between services shall be required along
with the associated revenues and costs.
   (E)   Channel quantity and quality.
      (1)   Further, as an additional requirement, before the second
anniversary of the effective date of this chapter, any MCS provider classified
as a cable operator and providing cable service within the city shall have
designed and activated a multi-channel system with a minimum capability of
providing 60 full time video services.
      (2)   Further, the Council/franchising authority is committed that the
goal of the CCPA, as set forth in Section 601(4) of the Act, codified at 47 USC
521(4), is met at all times. As a result, the Council/franchising authority
expressly requires that upon the advent, implementation, and transmission of
high definition television (HDTV), its functional equivalent, or any
subsequently developed technological advancement affecting channel capacity or
needed bandwidth for any video programming source or service, the cable
operator shall not lessen, dilute, or decrease the mix, level, quality, or
quantity of programming services carried on the cable system for reasons of
lack of adequate channel capacity.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.147 MCS PROVIDERS CLASSIFIED AS CABLE OPERATORS; SPECIFIC ADDITIONAL
PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL, AND GOVERNMENTAL RULES.
   (A)   The Council/franchising authority recognizes that under Section 611 of
the CCPA, codified at 47 USC 531, the Council/franchising authority has certain
power with respect to certain aspects for public, educational, or governmental
(PEG) use which is provided by MCS providers classified as cable operators.
   (B)   To the extent permitted by law, and in order to fulfill the Council/
franchising authority's desired goal of a public, educational, and governmental
(PEG) access policy that will facilitate the long-range needs of the city, the
Council/franchising authority adopts the following:
      (1)   At the time of an initial application for an MCS franchise for a
cable system, and contained within any renewal franchise agreement, an MCS
provider classified as a cable operator shall pledge to include the following
guarantees:
         (a)   An MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall provider,
at its own expense, one 12 hour educational channel; and
         (b)   An MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall provide, at
its own expense, one 12 hour governmental channel that is available for
providing coverage of Council meetings and other related programming offered or
designed by the City Manager, or designated official, including department
heads; and
         (c)   An MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall provide, at
its own expense, one 12 hour public access channel that is available for use by
various community groups and organizations.
         (d)   Such requirements may not require three separate channels;
rather, that sufficient channel capacity exists at any time to accommodate the
needs of the users of the PEG channels.
      (2)   Both the Council/franchising authority and the affected cable
operator shall review use after every six months, including the percentage of
use of every PEG channel. At the end of each six month period, the Council/
franchising authority shall evaluate the response and actual use of such
channels. If, after any six month period, the percentage of use for any
required PEG channel drops below 25% of the total time allocated, then the
required number of hours shall be reduced to a number that most closely
approximates the average hours of use per day. If the Council/franchising
authority determines the average hours of use per day for any required PEG
channel is less than four hours, then the requirement for that channel's
availability may be affirmatively waived by resolution, and an affected cable
operator may use such channel for any lawful purpose during the period of
waiver, which may be ended at any time by repeal of the resolution granting the
waiver, and upon a finding that demand for the PEG channel has increased beyond
the time allocated.
      (3)   If, at any time, 90% of the total time allocated for any required
PEG channel is consistently used five days a week for a period of six months,
then the cable operator shall provide an additional PEG channel.
      (4)   A cable operator is required to provide both mobile, portable, and
stationary equipment to be used for PEG access, together with the aid of
technical and production assistance provided by the cable operator. A cable
operator is required to provide equipment that can store programs for delayed
cablecasting and to provide delayed cablecasting. There will be no cost for
technical production assistance for PEG access use to any one user provided
that a single use does not exceed 50 actual production man-hours. Moreover, the
cost of maintenance of a PEG access studio and equipment required to run the
studio shall be borne by the cable operator.
   (C)   Costs of franchise requirements.
      (1)   The costs of satisfying franchise requirements to support public,
educational, and governmental channel shall consist of the sum of:
         (a)   All per channel costs for the number of channels used to meet
franchise requirements for public, educational, and governmental channels;
         (b)   Any direct costs of meeting such franchise requirements; and
         (c)   A reasonable allocation of general and administrative overhead.
      (2)   The costs of satisfying any other requirement under the franchise
shall consist of the direct and indirect costs, including a reasonable
allocation of general and administrative costs.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
§ 112.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Criminal penalties.
      (1)   Any violation or failure to abide by and comply with any provision
or requirement of this chapter shall be a violation of city ordinance, and
shall be punished as a Class C Misdemeanor, subject to a fine up to $500 per
occurrence, unless otherwise provided by state law.
      (2)   Each day upon which there exists a violation of this chapter, or a
failure to abide by or comply with any provision or requirement of this
chapter, shall constitute a separate occurrence, and may subject the MCS
provider to separate criminal penalties.
   (B)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Civil penalties may be imposed for the violation of any provision
of this chapter, as follows:
         (a)   Up to $200 for each violation, and each day of a continuing
violation may be considered, a new violation; and/or
         (b)   If applicable, default and revocation of a franchise granted
pursuant to this chapter, subject however, to the procedural guidelines noted
in this chapter and any franchise or licensee which applies to the provider,
and further subject to any limitations imposed by federal or state law.
      (2)   Monetary civil penalties may be imposed in the manner prescribed by
either local or state law.
(Ord. 4-1994-20, passed 4-12-94)
CHAPTER 113: FIRE PROTECTION BUSINESS
Section
   
113.01   Title
   
113.02   Definition
   
113.03   Application
   
113.04   License required
   
113.05   License application; bond; fee
   
113.06   Agents, employees, and representatives
   
113.07   Sales, installation, service
   
113.08   Tests
   
113.09   Transferability and expiration date
   
113.10   Suspension or revocation
   
113.11   Maintenance of equipment
   
113.12   Prohibitions
Cross-reference:
   Fire protection and prevention, see
Ch. 93
§ 113.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Fire Protection Business Licensing
Ordinance.”
('68 Code, § 12½-1) (Ord. 4-1975-9, passed 4-8-75)
§ 113.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE PROTECTION BUSINESS. The business of:
      (1)   Buying, selling, servicing, repairing, or maintaining portable fire
extinguishers.
      (2)   Selling, installation, repair or maintenance of fire alarm and fire
detection equipment.
      (3)   Selling or performing flameproofing service.
      (4)   Installation, repair or maintaining of special fixed extinguishing
systems, including foam, carbon dioxide, or dry chemical.
      (5)   Local retail stores who are engaged in the selling of fire
extinguishers approved by the City and State Fire Marshal and who do not
repair, maintain or service said extinguishers are excluded from compliance of
this chapter.
('68 Code, § 12½-2) (Ord. 4-1975-9, passed 4-8-75)
§ 113.03 APPLICATION.
   No person shall be issued a license to engage in the fire protection
business unless he is familiar with the provisions of this chapter and the
practices prescribed by the regulations of the National Fire Protection
Association or other approved nationally recognized safety standards.
('68 Code, § 12½-3) (Ord. 4-1975-9, passed 4-8-75)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.04 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the fire protection
business within the corporate limits of the city without first having applied
for and obtained a license therefor from the city.
('68 Code, § 12½-4) (Ord. 4-1975-9, passed 4-8-75)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.05 LICENSE APPLICATION; BOND; FEE.
   (A)   Applications for the license provided for in the preceding section
shall be made in writing on a form provided by the city for that purpose and
shall be filed with the Fire Marshal.
   (B)   Before a license may be issued to an applicant:
      (1)   The Fire Marshal shall find that the applicant is responsible and
qualified to engage in the fire protection business;
      (2)   The applicant shall file with the Fire Marshal a good and
sufficient bond, in the amount as provided for below, written by a company
authorized to make such bond under the laws of the state, conditioned that such
licensee shall well and faithfully perform the required duties and obligations
of the fire protection business and conditioned that such licensee shall not
violate any provisions of this chapter, such bond to be approved by the City
Attorney; and
      (3)   The applicant shall pay an annual licensee fee in the sum as listed
in the following schedule:
 
Type of Service          Bond       Fee
Fire extinguishers       $ 5,000  $ 25 first year
                                    25 thereafter
Fire alarm and detection 5,000      15
Flameproofing            5,000      15
Fixed systems            5,000      15
 
      (4)   In addition to the above schedule, where more than one type of
service is to be performed, each additional service shall require a $1,000 bond
and $10 annual license fee.
('68 Code, § 12½-5) (Ord. 4-1975-9, passed 4-8-75)
§ 113.06 AGENTS, EMPLOYEES, AND REPRESENTATIVES.
   No person shall engage in the fire protection business as an agent, employee
or representative unless the employer of such person is licensed under this
chapter to engage in the fire protection business. No license under this
chapter shall allow, permit or suffer an agent, employee or representative to
engage in the fire protection business unless such agent, employee or
representative is familiar with the provisions of this chapter and the practice
prescribed by it. Violation of this section by a license or agent, employee or
representative thereof, shall be grounds for revocation of the license of such
licensee.
('68 Code, § 12½-6) (Ord. 4-1975-9, passed 4-8-75)
§ 113.07 SALES, INSTALLATION, SERVICE.
   The Chief of the Fire Prevention Bureau or Fire Marshal shall have power to
promulgate rules and regulations governing the sales, installation's and
services as covered by this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall not be
inconsistent with the standards prescribed by the National Fire Protection
Association. He shall also have the power to have withdrawn from sale any fire
appliances that are considered a hazard to the health of the public.
('68 Code, § 12½-7) (Ord. 4-1975-9, passed 4-8-75; Am. Ord. 3-1976-11, passed
3-9-76)
§ 113.08 TESTS.
   Acceptance or performance tests may be required at the option of the Chief
of the Fire Prevention Bureau or Fire Marshal covering any product or service
sold under the terms of this chapter.
('68 Code, § 12½-8) (Ord. 4-1975-9, passed 4-8-75; Am. Ord. 3-1976-11, passed
3-9-76)
§ 113.09 TRANSFERABILITY AND EXPIRATION DATE.
   A license to engage in the fire protection business issued under the terms
of this chapter shall be a personal privilege only and may be suspended and
revoked as provided in the following section. Each such license shall be
nontransferable and shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the calendar
year in which such license is issued.
('68 Code, § 12½-9) (Ord. 4-1975-9, passed 4-8-75)
§ 113.10 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Chief of the Fire Prevention Bureau or Fire Marshal is authorized
to suspend or revoke the license of any licensee who has violated any
provisions of this chapter or has failed to obtain the approved practices of
the National Fire Protection Association. Revocation of a license shall
automatically forfeit the bond provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   In the event the Chief of the Fire Prevention Bureau or Fire Marshal
revokes or suspends the license of any licensee or refuses approval to an
applicant for license, such person shall have the right to appeal to the City
Council by filing such appeal in writing within 15 days after such revocation,
suspension or refusal. A hearing on such appeal shall be heard by the City
Council within 30 days from the filing of the appeal with the City Council.
('68 Code, § 12½-10) (Ord. 4-1975-9, passed 4-8-75; Am. Ord. 3-1976-11, passed
3-9-76)
§ 113.11 MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT.
   Sprinkler systems, standpipe systems, fire alarm systems and other fire
protective or extinguishing systems or appliances which have been installed in
compliance with any permit or order, or because of any law or ordinance shall
be maintained in operating condition at all times, and it shall be unlawful for
any owner or occupant to reduce the effectiveness of the protection so
required; except this shall not prohibit the owner or occupant from temporarily
reducing or discontinuing the protection where necessary to make tests,
repairs, alterations or additions. The Fire Marshal shall be notified before
such tests, repairs, alterations or additions are started unless the work is to
be continuous until completion.
('68 Code, § 12½-11) (Ord. 4-1975-9, passed 4-8-75)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.12 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   The sale of carbon tetrachloride base vaporizing liquid extinguishers
is hereby prohibited.
   (B)   The sale of miniature extinguishers of unknown or questionable value
(commonly known as “beer can extinguishers”), which do not bear the seal of
approval of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or some other nationally
recognized testing laboratory, is prohibited.
('68 Code, § 12½-12) (Ord. 4-1975-9, passed 4-8-75)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 114: HOTELS AND MOTELS
Section
Hotel Occupancy Tax
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Levy of tax; rate; exceptions
   
114.03   Collection
   
114.04   Reports
   
114.05   Rules and relations
   
114.06   Use of funds
   
114.07   Violations
 
   
114.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Taxation and finance, see
Ch. 35
HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSIDERATION. The cost of the room, sleeping space, bed or other facility
in such hotel and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal
services rendered to the occupant not related to the cleaning and readying of
such room, sleep space, bed or other facility for occupancy.
   DIRECTOR OF FINANCE. The Director of Finance of the City of Cleburne.
   HOTEL. A facility in which members of the public obtain sleeping
accommodations for consideration. The term includes a hotel, motel, tourist
home, tourist house, tourist court, lodging house, inn or rooming house, but
does not include a hospital, sanitarium or nursing home.
   MONTHLY PERIOD. Occurring, appearing, or coming due every month of the 12
months of the calendar year.
   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of
any room or rooms, sleeping space, bed or other facility in a hotel for any
purpose.
   OCCUPANT. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to
use or possess any room or rooms, sleeping space, bed or other facility in a
hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract
or agreement.
   PERMANENT RESIDENT. Any person who has the right to use or possess a room in
a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days, so long as there is no interruption
of payment for the period.
   PERSON. Any individual, company, corporation or association owning,
operating, managing or controlling any hotel.
   QUARTERLY PERIOD. A quarter of the calendar year. The first quarter is
composed of the months of January, February and March; the second quarter is
composed of the months of April, May and June; the third quarter is composed of
the months of July, August and September; and the fourth quarter is composed of
the months of October, November, and December.
('68 Code, § 26-11) (Ord. 11-1977-44, passed 11-8-77; Am. Ord. 9-1991-32,
passed 10-8-91; Am. Ord. 02-2011-02, passed 2-22-11)
§ 114.02 LEVY OF TAX; RATE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   There is levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any sleeping room
or space within the city and the extra-territorial jurisdiction of the city
furnished by any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2 or
more per day. Such tax shall be equal to 7% of the consideration paid by the
occupant of such room to such hotel.
   (B)   No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident.
   (C)   No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon an officer or employee of the
United States, the State of Texas or an agency, institution, board or
commission of the State of Texas (other than an institution of higher education
as defined in Tex. Education Code § 61.003) when traveling on or otherwise
engaged in the course of official duties thereof.
('68 Code, § 26-12) (Ord. 11-1977-44, passed 11-8-77; Am. Ord. 9-1983-36,
passed 9-13-83; Am. Ord. 9-1991-32, passed 10-8-91)
§ 114.03 COLLECTION.
   (A)   Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel
shall collect the tax imposed in §
114.02 for the city.
   (B)   If a person who is liable for the payment of a tax under this
subchapter is the owner of a hotel and sells the hotel, the successor to the
seller or the seller's assignee shall withhold an amount of the purchase price
sufficient to pay the amount due until the seller provides a receipt showing
that the amount has been paid or to the Director of Finance a certificate
showing that no tax is due.
   (C)   The purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold an amount of the
purchase price as required by this section is liable for the amount required to
be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price.
   (D)   The purchaser of a hotel may request that the Director of Finance
issue a certificate stating that no tax is due or issue a statement of the
amount required to be paid before a certificate may be issued. The Director of
Finance shall issue the certificate or statement not later than the 60th day
after the date that the person receives the request.
   (E)   If the Director of Finance fails to issue the certificate or statement
within the period provided by division (D), the purchaser is released from the
obligation to withhold the purchase price or pay the amount due.
   (F)   Divisions (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section apply to the
withholding of an amount of a purchase price of a hotel by the owner of a hotel
who is liable for the payment of hotel occupancy taxes without regard to
whether the liability for the taxes arose before, on or after the effective
date of this section.
('68 Code, § 26-13) (Ord. 11-1977-44, passed 11-8-77; Am. Ord. 9-1983-36,
passed 9-13-83; Am. Ord. 9-1991-32, passed 10-8-91)
§ 114.04 REPORTS.
   On or before the last day of the month, every person required hereby to
collect the tax imposed by this subchapter shall file a report with the
Director of Finance showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in
the preceding month, the amount of tax collected on the city’s behalf on such
occupancies, and any other information as the Director of Finance may
reasonably require. Such person shall pay over the tax due on such occupancies
at the time of filing such report. There shall also be furnished to the
Director of Finance of the City of Cleburne at the time of payment of such tax,
a copy of the monthly tax report filed with the state comptroller in connection
with the State of Texas Hotel Occupancy Tax.
('68 Code, § 26-14) (Ord. 11-1977-44, passed 11-8-77; Am. Ord. 9-1991-32,
passed 10-8-91; Am. Ord. 02-2011-02, passed 2-22-11) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.05 RULES AND RELATIONS.
   The Director of Finance with the advice and consent of the city attorney,
shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to
effectively collect the tax levied herein, and shall upon reasonable notice
have access to the books and records necessary to enable him to determine and
correctness of any report filed as required by this subchapter, and the amount
of taxes due under the provisions of this subchapter.
('68 Code, § 26-15) (Ord. 11-1977-44, passed 11-8-77; Am. Ord. 9-1991-32,
passed 10-8-91)
§ 114.06 USE OF FUNDS.
   The revenue derived from the hotel occupancy tax authorized by this
subchapter may be used for those purposes stated in Tex. Tax Code, Subchapter
351, as it may be amended, and any other purposes allowed under the laws of the
state; provided that a portion of the tax revenue equal to 1% of the cost of
the occupancy of hotel rooms shall be reserved for the purposes stated for such
reserved tax revenue in Tex. Tax Code § 351.005, as it may be amended. These
reserved tax revenue funds may be used by the city for the purposes allowed or
the city may contract with persons or organizations to use these reserved tax
revenue funds for the purposes allowed.
('68 Code, § 26-16) (Ord. 11-1977-44, passed 11-8-77; Am. Ord. 9-1991-32,
passed 10-8-91)
§ 114.07 VIOLATIONS.  
   (A)   Failure to file or pay tax. If any person shall fail to file a report
as required herein or shall fail to pay to the Director of Finance the tax as
imposed herein when the report or payment is due, he shall forfeit 5% of the
amount due as a penalty; and after the first 30 days he shall forfeit an
additional 5% of such tax; provided, however, that the penalty shall never be
less than $1.
   (B)   Delinquent taxes. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at a rate of 6%
per annum beginning 60 days from the date due.
('68 Code, § 26-18)
   (C)   Failure to collect. In addition to the penalty set forth in §
114.99, the City Attorney is authorized to bring suit against any person
required to collect the tax imposed by this chapter and required to pay the
collection over to the city and who has failed to file a report, or filed a
false report, or failed to pay the tax when due. Such suit may seek to collect
such tax not paid and/or to enjoin such person from operating a hotel in the
city until the tax is paid or the report is filed or both.
   (D)   Lien. Furthermore, upon the failure to file reports or pay taxes as
herein required for any period, the city is also hereby authorized and
empowered to make an assessment of the taxes owed for such period and to fix a
lien upon the property located within the city and within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city; the tax assessed together with any penalties provided
by statute shall be a prior and superior lien on all property of the hotel.
('68 Code, § 26-17(b),(c))
(Ord. 11-1977-44, passed 11-8-77; Am. Ord. 4-1990-6, passed 4-20-90; Am. Ord.
9-1991-32, passed 10-8-91)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   If any person required by the provisions of §§
114.01 et seq. to collect the tax imposed herein, make reports as required by
this subchapter, and pay to the Director of Finance the tax imposed by this
subchapter, shall fail to collect such tax, shall fail to file such report or
shall fail to pay such tax, or if such person shall file a false report, such
person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500, and each and every day a violation
exists shall be deemed a separate and complete offense.
('68 Code, § 26-17(a)) (Ord. 11-1977-44, passed 11-8-77; Am. Ord. 4-1990-6,
passed 4-20-90; Am. Ord. 9-1991-32, passed 10-8-91; Am Ord. 02-2011-02, passed
2-22-11)
CHAPTER 115: JUNK DEALERS
Section
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   Records to be kept
   
115.03   Inspection by police
   
115.04   Junk to be retained for 24 hours
   
115.05   Purchase or receipt of goods from minors
   
115.06   Falsification of records
Cross-reference:
   Junk yard permitted in M-2 Zoning District if screened, see §
155.28
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK. Old scrap iron, scrap tin, scrap copper, scrap lead, scrap zinc, and
all odds and ends of other scrap metal and their alloys, bones, old rags, cloth
or rubber, rope, tin foil, old batteries, old cotton, mechanical and garden
tools, utensils, fixtures, electrical appliances and supplies, gas fittings,
pipes and supplies, and water fittings, pipes and supplies, sinks and commodes,
water tanks and bathtubs and fittings and supplies thereto, lawn hose and
harness, old dilapidated automobiles which are purchased for the purpose of
being dismantled, and the parts, tires and tubes of such automobiles, or the
odds and ends of any of such, and automobile casings, tubes and rims.
   JUNK DEALER. Any person buying, selling, receiving for storage, retaining as
pledge for the payment of moneys loaned, or in any other way acquiring or
dealing in junk, as defined herein, for the purpose of profit or gain.
('68 Code, § 16-1)
§ 115.02 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   Every junk dealer doing business or offering to do business within the city
shall keep books, and separate blanks, in which shall be fairly and legibly
written in ink, at the time each purchase or the deposit of any goods, in
pledge or for any purpose, with such dealer, an accurate account and
description, in the English language, of the goods or articles or things
purchased or deposited; the amount of money paid for same or loaned thereon;
and the time of purchase or deposit of same; the name, street and number of
residence and nationality of the person selling or depositing the goods,
articles or things; and a description of such person, which shall include the
approximate size, the age and the sex and color of such person, as well as a
description of the clothes worn by such person as near as practicable. No entry
made in such books shall be obliterated, erased or defaced.
('68 Code, § 16-2)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.03 INSPECTION BY POLICE.
   The records specified in §
115.02, as well as any article or thing of value, sold or deposited, shall at
all reasonable times be open to the inspection of the Chief of Police, or any
member of the police force, and it shall be the duty of every junk dealer to
make out and deliver to the Chief of Police or any police officer, upon demand,
a legible and correct copy from such records, a correct account and
description, in the English language, of the goods and articles or other thing
purchased or deposited during the preceding day, or a correct copy of the
entries on any date as required by the Chief of Police or police officer, which
copy shall give the time, naming the hour, when said purchase or deposit was
made and a description of the person by whom made, or from whom purchased.
('68 Code, § 16-3)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.04 JUNK TO BE RETAINED FOR 24 HOURS.
   No junk received on deposit or purchased by any junk dealer shall be sold or
permitted to be redeemed or removed from the place of business of such dealer
for the space of 24 hours after such purchase, loan or deposit.
('68 Code, § 16-4) (Am. Ord. passed 8-10-54)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.05 PURCHASE OR RECEIPT OF GOODS FROM MINORS.
   No junk dealer shall purchase or receive in pledge or on deposit for any
purpose, in the course of his business, any goods, article or thing of value
whatever from any minor within the city, or any goods, articles or thing of
value, the ownership of which is in, or which is claimed by, any minor, or
which may be in the possession or under the control of a minor, unless such
minor's parents or guardian shall state in writing that such transaction took
place with such parent's or guardian's full knowledge and consent, and it shall
be the duty of such dealer to preserve and keep on file such written statement
for the purpose of subsequent reference thereto.
('68 Code, § 16-5)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.06 FALSIFICATION OF RECORDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully falsify any entry in any
book or record required to be preserved under this chapter.
('68 Code, § 16-6)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 116: SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS AND HANDBILL DISTRIBUTION
Section
General Provisions
   
116.01   Purpose
   
116.02   Definitions
   
116.03   Exemptions
   
116.04   General regulations
   
116.05   Solicitation from a vehicle
Registration for Solicitation
   
116.15   Registration required for solicitation; fees
   
116.16   Application
   
116.17   Solicitation by minors; applications
   
116.18   Compliance with law
   
116.19   Application review and registration acceptance
   
116.20   Registration certificate
   
116.21   Revocation or suspension of registration
   
116.22   Appeals
 
   
116.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 116.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the general health,
public safety and welfare, comfort, convenience and protection of the city and
the residents of the city by:
      (1)   Prohibiting door-to-door solicitation and canvassing activity at
residences during the times when such activity is most intrusive and disruptive
to citizens’ privacy;
      (2)   Regulating the manner in which any solicitation activity,
canvassing activity or handbill distribution may occur to promote good order,
prevent litter and protect citizens from aggressive and intimidating practices;
and
      (3)   Requiring solicitors to register with the city to aid crime
detection and deter deceptive practices and fraud.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to accomplish these
purposes.
(Ord. 09-2021-51, passed 9-14-21)
§ 116.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Assistant Chief or some other employee of the city
designated by the Police Chief.
   CANVASSER. A person who engages in canvassing activities.
   CANVASSING or CANVASSING ACTIVITY. The act of:
      (1)   Traveling either by foot or vehicle, going door-to-door, house-to-
house, building-to-building; or
      (2)   Occupying space in or traveling on or through any public place in
the city;
      (3)   Personally contacting persons to communicate in any manner, whether
orally, by written or printed materials including, but not limited to,
handbills, leaflets, hand signing or by any other method, direct or implied,
for any purpose other than selling or taking orders for goods, wares,
merchandise or services or collecting money.
   CITY. The City of Cleburne, Texas.
   DARK. The time of day identified by the United States Naval Observatory as
being after the end of civil twilight on a particular day in the city.
   HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copies of any manner.
   HANDBILL DISTRIBUTION. Traveling either by foot or vehicle, going door-to-
door, house-to-house or building-to-building without personally contacting
persons to distribute or leave on or at each premises handbills for any
purpose.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any person who engages in, does, or transacts any
temporary or transient business and who, for the purpose of carrying on such
business, occupies any location for a period of less than one year. ITINERANT
MERCHANT includes any person who sells or takes product orders out of a vehicle
parked on premises where there is no related business building.
   NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION. An organization or entity that is exempt from the
payment of tax pursuant to § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   POLICE CHIEF. The Police Chief of the city.
   SELLING. To sell, dispense, peddle, hawk, display, offer to sell or solicit
for sale by offering or exposing for sale any goods, wares, merchandise or
services.
   SOLICITATION ACTIVITIES. The act of:
      (1)   Traveling either by foot or vehicle, going door-to-door, house-to-
house, building-to-building; or
      (2)   Occupying space in or traveling on or through any public place in
the city;
      while personally contacting persons to ask, barter or communicate in any
manner, whether orally, by written or printed materials including but not
limited to handbills or leaflets, hand signing or by any other method, direct
or implied, for the purpose of selling or taking orders for goods, wares,
merchandise, or services. The term SOLICITATION ACTIVITIES includes any
activities conducted by an itinerant merchant.
   SOLICITOR. A person who engages in solicitation activities.
('68 Code, § 21-13) (Ord. 12-1978-58, passed 12-12-78; Am. Ord. 09-2021, passed
9-14-21)
§ 116.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter does not apply to:
      (1)   The activity of a person with an appointment calling upon or
dealing with manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors, brokers or retailers at
their place of business and in the usual course of business;
      (2)   The activity of a person acting at the request or invitation of the
owner or occupant of a residence;
      (3)   Sales made under the authority of and by judicial order;
      (4)   The activity of a government employee acting within the course and
scope of their official duties serving, delivering or posting official notices
including notices of code violations, water restrictions, utility outages, burn
bans, special event impacts or security issues; or
      (5)   The activity of a person under the authority of a permit issued
under
Chapter 94 of this code.
      (6)   The activity of a person who is a real estate agent, political
candidate, or a person acting or campaigning on behalf of a political candidate
or in response to an upcoming ballot issue.
      (7)   The activity of a person approved or invited to sell items at
established markets, charitable functions, and community festivals and special
events.
   (B)   It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution for any offense
under this chapter that the activity of the defendant is listed in division
(A).
(Ord. 09-2021-51, passed 9-14-21) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.04 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation or
canvassing activity at a residence:
      (1)   Before 9:00 a.m.; or
      (2)   After 7:00 p.m.
      (3)   On Sundays or federal holidays.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation
activities, canvassing activities, or handbill distribution at a premises with
a posted notice that such activity is not welcomed or invited. It shall be
presumed that there is notice that solicitation or canvassing activity is not
welcomed or invited when there is exhibited in a conspicuous place on or near
the main entrance of the premises, a sign, not less than four inches by three
inches in size, containing the words “No Solicitors,” “No Trespassing,” or
words of similar meaning in letters not less than two-thirds of one inch in
height.
   (C)   A person who is not the owner or tenant of a premises commits an
offense if the person removes, defaces or otherwise renders illegible a sign
placed by the owner or tenant of the premises pursuant to division (B) of this
section.
   (D)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation
activities, canvassing activities, or handbill distribution and remains or
lingers on a premises after being informed by the owner or tenant that they are
not welcome.
   (E)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation
activities, canvassing activities, or handbill distribution in an aggressive or
intimidating manner. The term AGGRESSIVE OR INTIMIDATING MANNER means:
      (1)   Blocking the path of a person who is the object of the activity; or
      (2)   Following behind, ahead or alongside a person who walks away from
the solicitor after being solicited, approached, accosted or offered a
handbill, leaflet or any other item.
   (F)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation
activities, canvassing activities, or handbill distribution and distributes,
deposits, places, throws, scatters, or casts a handbill at a residence except
by:
      (1)   Handing or transmitting the handbill directly to the owner or
occupant then present in or upon the premises; or
      (2)   Without using adhesive or tape, placing or depositing the handbill
in a manner that secures the handbill and prevents it from being blown away,
except that mailboxes may not be used when the use is prohibited by federal
postal laws or regulations.
   (G)   A person commits an offense if the person secures a handbill at a
residence in the manner described by division (F)(2) of this section:
      (1)   In a place that is more than five feet from the front door of the
residence; or
      (2)   When another handbill has already been left or secured at the
residence and has not been removed from the outside of the residence.
('68 Code, §§ 21-1, 21-2) (Am. Ord. 09-2021-51, passed 9-14-21) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.05 SOLICITATION FROM A VEHICLE.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person conducts solicitation
activities from a vehicle and:
      (1)   The solicitation is conducted at a location within the right-of-way
of any street or highway in the city which is designated as a highway or
freeway, major or minor arterial on the city’s thoroughfare plan; or
      (2)   The person stops the vehicle within a roadway to conduct business
before the vehicle has been approached, called, or waived down by a prospective
customer.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person operates a vehicle from
which solicitation activities are conducted upon any street or highway within
the city in a manner that blocks or impedes access to or from any alley, street
or driveway, or impedes the flow of traffic on any public street or highway.
('68 Code, §§ 21-1, 21-2) (Ord. 09-2021-51, passed 9-14-21) Penalty, see §
116.99
REGISTRATION FOR SOLICITATION
§ 116.15 REGISTRATION REQUIRED FOR SOLICITATION; FEES.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation
activities in the city without a valid registration certificate issued by the
Administrator.
   (B)   A registration certificate shall be valid for one year following the
date of its issuance unless a shorter period is requested by the applicant.
   (C)   An applicant for a registration certificate shall pay a non-refundable
application fee at the time the application is submitted, and if required,
shall submit a bond.
   (D)   (1)   The amount of the non-refundable application fee shall be:
         (a)   Annual permit fee for person, firm, corporation or organization
and a single agent, employee or volunteer: $50.
         (b)   Annual permit for each additional agent, employee or volunteer:
$10.
      (2)   The non-refundable application fee shall be used for the purpose of
defraying administrative expenses incident to the issuing of registration
certificates.
   (E)   A non-profit organization or a person conducting solicitation activity
on behalf of a non-profit organization is exempt from payment of the
application fee and the bond requirement set forth in § 116.18 of this chapter.
('68 Code, §§ 21-14, 21-17, 21-18) (Ord. 12-1978-58, passed 12-12-78; Am. Ord.
09-2021-51, passed 9-14-21) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.16 APPLICATION.
   A person desiring to conduct solicitation activities within the city shall
make a written application on a form provided by the Administrator for a
registration certificate. The application shall contain or be submitted with
the following information:
   (A)   The full name, date of birth, phone number and address of the
applicant;
   (B)   A valid state driver’s license number or a state-approved
identification card number (the Administrator will make a photocopy and attach
to the application) of the applicant;
   (C)   Except as provided by §
116.17(C), two photographs of the applicant, measuring one and one-half inches
by one and one-half inches and showing the head and shoulders of the applicant
in a clear and distinguishing manner, which shall have been taken within the
preceding 60 days before filing the application;
   (D)   If a vehicle or vehicles are used to conduct the solicitation
activity, a description of each vehicle, its license plate number and vehicle
identification number, the name and license number of the driver who will
operate each vehicle, and adequate proof under state law that each driver
maintains financial responsibility for the vehicle they will operate shall be
attached to the application;
   (E)   If the applicant is acting as an employee, agent or volunteer, the
name and physical street address (not a post office box) and telephone number
of the employer, principal or organization with credentials in written form
establishing the relationship and authority of the employee, agent or volunteer
to act for the employer, principal or organization;
   (F)   If applicable, the merchandise to be sold or offered for sale, the
nature of the services to be furnished;
   (G)   The approximate time period within which the solicitation is to be
made, stating the date of the beginning of the solicitation activity, its
projected conclusion and the proposed dates and times of solicitation;
   (H)   Whether the applicant, upon any order obtained, will demand, accept or
receive payment or the deposit of money in advance of final delivery, and if
so, a copy of the bond required by §
116.18 of this chapter;
   (I)   If the applicant, or the applicant’s employer or principal has pled
guilty, or nolo contendere to, or has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor
involving fraud, deceit, theft, embezzlement, burglary, larceny, fraudulent
conversion, misrepresentation, or misappropriation of property within ten years
preceding the date of application, a description of each such conviction or
plea, the name of the court and jurisdiction in which the complaint or
indictment was filed and the date of the offense;
   (J)   If the applicant, or the applicant’s employer or principal is a person
against whom a civil judgment or administrative decision based upon fraud,
deceit, theft, embezzlement, burglary, larceny, fraudulent conversion,
misrepresentation, or misappropriation of property has been entered or ordered
within ten years preceding the date of application, a description of judgment
or action, the case or cause number, if any, and the court or administrative
agency that rendered the judgment or decision;
   (K)   If the solicitation activity is to be conducted on behalf of a non-
profit organization, proof of such status shall be attached to the application.
('68 Code, § 21-15) (Ord. 12-1978-58, passed 12-12-78; Am. Ord. 09-2021-51,
passed 9-14-21)
§ 116.17 SOLICITATION BY MINORS; APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   A minor who conducts solicitation activities shall be sponsored or
employed by a person over the age of 18, a corporation, firm or organization.
The person, corporation, firm or organization that is sponsoring or employing
the minor(s) is responsible for controlling the conduct of the minors and the
minors shall be under the constant supervisor of a person 18 years of age or
older.
   (B)   A person, corporation, firm or organization that sponsors or employs
one or more minors as solicitors must submit one application and pay the
nonrefundable application fee, in the amount set forth in §
116.15(D), except as provided for in §
116.15(E), for the registration of the minors regardless of the number of
minors who conduct solicitation activities. The sponsor or employer shall
provide the administrator the name(s), date(s) of birth, address(es) and
driver’s license number(s) (if applicable), and a notarized parental consent
for each minor that will be conducting solicitation activities. The parental
consent form, which shall be provided by the Administrator, shall acknowledge
the release of the information set forth above.
   (C)   A minor who conducts solicitation activities is exempt from §
116.20 shall be required to carry while conducting solicitation activities only
a copy of the approved solicitor’s registration application.
(Ord. 09-2021-51, passed 9-14-21) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.18 COMPLIANCE WITH LAW.
   The applicant for a permit required by this subchapter shall furnish
satisfactory proof that all laws and regulations governing his or her business
or the sale of products or services by such business have been complied with.
This shall expressly include, but shall not be limited to, the state sales tax
laws. In addition hereto, all applicants and permit holders shall not violate
any consumer protection laws. CONSUMER PROTECTION LAWS as used in this section
means any federal, state or local laws or regulations which are intended to
protect consumers in business transactions. This term shall expressly include,
but is not limited to, the Home Solicitation Transactions Act, being Tex. Rev.
Civ. Stat., Art. 5069-13.01 through 5069-13.07, as it is hereinafter amended.
('68 Code, § 21-16) (Ord. 12-1978-58, passed 12-12-78)
§ 116.19 APPLICATION REVIEW AND REGISTRATION ACCEPTANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, the Administrator shall review the
application to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   The Administrator shall authorize the registration within 30 days of
receipt of the application unless:
      (1)   An investigation reveals that the applicant or the applicant’s
employer, principal or organization falsified information on the application;
      (2)   Within ten years preceding the date of application, the applicant
or the applicant’s employer, principal or organization has pled guilty or nolo
contendere to, or has been convicted of, a felony or misdemeanor described in §
116.16(I);
      (3)   Within ten years preceding the date of application, a civil
judgment or administrative decision described in §
116.16(J) has been entered or ordered against the applicant or the applicant’s
employer, principal or organization;
      (4)   The applicant provided no proof of authority to act on behalf of
the employer, principal or organization;
      (5)   The application does not contain the information or documents
required by §
116.16
   (C)   The denial and the reasons for the denial shall be noted on the
application, and the applicant shall be notified of the denial by notice mailed
to the applicant and the applicant’s employer, principal or organization at the
address shown on the application or the last known address. The notice of
denial shall be mailed within 30 days of the receipt of the application.
('68 Code, § 21-19) (Ord. 12-1978-58, passed 12-12-78; Am. Ord. 09-2021-51,
passed 9-14-21)
§ 116.20 REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   Upon authorization of the registration, the Administrator shall
deliver a registration certificate for each solicitor.
   (B)   The registration certificate shall be in the form of a photo
identification tag and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the solicitor;
      (2)   The solicitor’s employer, principal or organization, if applicable;
      (3)   The kind of goods or services to be sold or offered for sale, if
applicable;
      (4)   A description and license plate number of any vehicle to be used in
carrying out the solicitation activities, if applicable;
      (5)   A registration number; and
      (6)   The dates of issuance and expiration of the certificate.
   (C)   The registration certificate shall be worn constantly in a conspicuous
place by the permit holder while conducting solicitation activities in the
city. A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation
activities and fails or refuses to show or display the registration certificate
upon the request of any person.
   (D)   A registration certificate shall be used only by the solicitor for
whom it was issued and may not be transferred to another person. A person
commits an offense if the person wears or displays a photo identification tag
issued to another person.
   (E)   A permit holder who conducts solicitation activities related to alarm
systems shall advise all potential purchasers of the city’s regulations related
to alarm systems found in Chapter 104 of the Code of Cleburne, Texas.
('68 Code, § 21-19) (Ord. 12-1978-58, passed 12-12-78; Am. Ord. 09-2021-51,
passed 9-14-21)
§ 116.21 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF REGISTRATION.
   A registration certificate issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or
suspended by the Administrator, after notice and hearing, for any of the
following reasons:
   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for registration;
   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made by a solicitor in
the course of conducting solicitation activities;
   (C)   A plea or conviction of a crime described in §
116.16(I);
   (D)   A judgment involving a matter described in §
116.16(J);
   (E)   The type of solicitation activity requires a bond, and the bond
requirements have not been complied with or the bond has expired or is no
longer valid; or
   (F)   A violation of any of the regulations set forth in this chapter.
('68 Code, § 21-22) (Ord. 12-1978-58, passed 12-12-78; Am. Ord. 09-2021-51,
passed 9-14-21)
§ 116.22 APPEALS.
   (A)   A person who is denied a registration certificate or whose
registration is revoked or suspended by the Administrator may appeal the
decision to the Police Chief by filing notice of appeal with the Police Chief
within 15 days after the notice of the decision is mailed to the address
indicated on the application or the last known address.
   (B)   Within ten days of the receipt of the notice of appeal, the Police
Chief shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal which shall be not
later than 40 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal.
   (C)   Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be delivered to the
person by mail, sent to the address indicated on the application or the last
known address of the appellant.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Police Chief shall make a
decision on the appeal. The decision of the Police Chief on the appeal is
final. No other administrative procedures are provided by the city.
('68 Code, § 21-22) (Ord. 12-1978-58, passed 12-12-78; Am. Ord. 09-2021-51,
passed 9-14-21)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the terms and
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with §
10.99 of this code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder.
   (B)   In case of any willful violation of any of the terms and provisions of
this chapter, the city, in addition to imposing the penalties provided in
division (A), may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in any court
having proper jurisdiction, to restrain, correct or abate such violations; and
the definition of any violation as a misdemeanor shall not preclude the city
from invoking the civil remedies given it by the laws of the state.
   (C)   The court trying a civil or criminal cause under divisions (A) or (B)
shall have the right and power upon judgment or conviction of any person for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter to decree and to make as a
part of the judgment or conviction in such cause the forfeiture of the
registration certificate required by this chapter. When a registration
certificate is forfeited in this manner, no further certificate shall be issued
to that person for one year from the date of judgment or conviction.
(Ord. 09-2021-51, passed 9-14-21)
CHAPTER 117: TAXIS; BUSES
Section
Taxicabs
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   Permits for taxicab business
   
117.03   Insurance
   
117.04   Payment of ad valorem tax on taxicabs
   
117.05   Rendering taxicabs for ad valorem taxes
   
117.06   Revocation or suspension of permits; record
   
117.07   Franchise fee; permit card
   
117.08   Identification of taxi
   
117.09   Taximeters and rates
   
117.10   Service required
   
117.11   Taxicab Inspectors and inspections
   
117.12   Records of taxistand owners; furnishing information relative to
accidents and crimes
Buses
   
117.35   Permit
   
117.36   Establishment of routes
   
117.37   Street rental charge
 
   
117.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Ambulances, see
Ch. 110
   Authority to regulate and license persons operating vehicles for hire, see
Charter §
3.10(J)
   Traffic Code, see
Title VII
TAXICABS
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   STREET. Any street, alley, avenue, boulevard, drive or highway commonly used
for the purpose of public travel within the incorporated limits of the city.
   TAXICAB. Every automobile used for the transportation of passengers for hire
over the public streets of the city, and not over a defined or fixed route, and
irrespective of whether or not the operations extend beyond the city limits of
the city, at rates for distance traveled or for wait-time, or for both, or at
rates per hour, per week or per month, and such vehicle is routed under the
direction of such passenger or passengers or such person or persons hiring the
same.
('68 Code, § 28-11) (Ord. 4-1974-16, passed 4-9-74)
§ 117.02 PERMITS FOR TAXICAB BUSINESS.
   (A)   No permit to operate a taxicab business shall be issued by the City
Secretary until the Council shall, after a hearing duly had, find that the
public convenience and necessity requires the proposed taxicab service for
which application for permits is made; provided, however, that such declaration
of public convenience and necessity shall not be necessary in the following
instances:
      (1)   For the authorizing of the same number of taxicabs authorized for
operation and operated by applicant under the same name on the date of the
passage of this subchapter, or the renewal of the same number of permits
annually thereafter, provided that such permits as have become invalid for
nonuser, as hereinafter provided, shall not be renewed.
      (2)   For the renewal of permits to the applicant for the number of
taxicabs for which the Council shall have approved at any time prior to the
application for such renewal; provided, however, that said taxicab owner shall
renew permit at the time of the expiration date appearing on permit now being
used.
   (B)   In determining whether public convenience and necessity requires the
authorizing of such taxicabs for which application may be made, the Council
shall take into consideration whether the demands for public convenience and
necessity require such proposed or additional taxicab service within the city;
the financial and moral responsibility and character of the applicant; the
number, kind, type and ownership of equipment, and the color scheme to be used
by the applicant, the increased traffic congestion of the streets of the city
which may result and whether the demands for public convenience and necessity
require such proposed or additional taxicab service within the city, both
vehicular and pedestrian, will be unduly endangered by the granting of such
additional permit; and such other relevant facts as the Council may deem
advisable or necessary which may throw light on the public necessity and
convenience.
   (C)   Any applicant for a taxicab permit to operate as a business shall, as
hereinafter provided, make application in writing accompanied by a financial
statement and show whether the applicant has ever been charged or convicted in
any court for any offense under any city or state or federal law and such
application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant. (This does not apply
if for renewal where permit is valid.) Such additional information as the
Council may require shall be furnished. Such application shall be considered at
the second regular meeting of the Council following the filing of the
application and all interested parties shall be heard by the Council at such
meeting. In all such hearings the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant
to establish by clear, cogent and convincing evidence that the public
convenience and necessity requires such operation of the vehicle or vehicles
for which such application has been made. Renewal permits will be issued upon
an application made to the City Secretary by the holder of a permit of the
previous year or expiration of date permit was issued. Notice of public hearing
shall be published in a local newspaper at least 15 days prior to the hearing.
   (D)   If the Council finds from its investigation and hearing that a public
convenience and necessity justified the operation of the vehicle or vehicles
for which said permit is desired, it shall instruct the City Secretary to issue
a permit to the applicant for the taxicab or taxicabs upon a compliance by the
applicant with all the provisions of this subchapter.
   (E)   No permit issued under the terms of this subchapter shall be
transferred to any other person, except with the written consent of the
Council, and shall not be used for the operation as a taxicab of any vehicle
except a vehicle owned or under the control of the holder of the permit.
   (F)   The permit issued for the operation of a taxicab under the terms of
this subchapter shall be posted within said taxicab in a conspicuous place and
a failure to so post said permit shall be a violation of this subchapter.
   (G)   All taxicab permits shall be valid until January 1 of the next ensuing
year following the date they are issued; and all taxicab permits issued during
any year shall expire on December 31 of such year, and must be renewed on
January 1 of the following year in the manner hereinbefore provided and said
permit shall be signed by the City Secretary of the city.
('68 Code, § 28-12) (Ord. 4-1974-16, passed 4-9-74)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.03 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Before any permit shall be issued to any owner of any taxicab as
hereinbefore defined or before any renewal or permit shall be granted, the
owner shall be required to file with the City Secretary, and to thereafter keep
in full force and effect, a policy of public liability insurance executed by an
insurance company duly authorized to do business in the state and performable
in the county and to be approved by the Council, insuring the public against
any loss or damage that may result to any person, persons or property in the
operation of such vehicle or vehicles and provided that the maximum amount of
recovery in such policy of insurance shall not, as to each and every vehicle,
be less than $10,000 for injury or death of one person; and not less than
$20,000 for injury or death for more than one person in any one accident; and
not less than $5,000 for the injury to or destruction of property in any one
accident.
   (B)   The public liability policy shall further provide that no action shall
lie thereon against the insurance company until after a final judgment in favor
of the injured or damaged person or persons, and against the owner of the
taxicab, not pending an appeal or writ of error, is, and remains unsatisfied.
   (C)   In the event that the Council shall determine, after a hearing duly
had, and after three days' notice given a permit holder, that any insurance
given by a permit owner has become impaired, so as to afford less protection to
the public than was originally filed, it may require a new or additional
policy, so as to bring the protection of said insurance to its original amount,
and the permit holder shall, within five days after receiving written notice of
such requirement, provided the required new or additional policy, failing
which, the permit of said permit holder shall automaticallY terminate. In the
event that any insurer may desire to be released from any policy, he may give
written notice of such desire to the Council at least ten days before he
desires his liability released, and the Council shall thereupon, by personal
delivery or by mail, give written notice to any such permit owner and demand
that such owner furnish new insurance by the expiration of the ten-day period
provided for, and shall discharge such first insurer from any liability which
shall accrue after the time of approval of such new policy that said permit
holder may file, or shall discharge such first insurer after the expiration of
the ten-day period.
   (D)   In the event any policy be so cancelled, upon the request of the
insurer, and no new policy is filed by said permit holder before the
cancellation of said original insurance, then the permit to operate taxicabs
granted to said permit holder shall be automatically revoked; neither the city
nor any officer thereof shall be held liable for the pecuniary responsibility
of solvency of any such insurer, or in any manner become liable for any sum on
account of any such claim or act of omission relating to any such taxicab, nor
shall the liability of any person owning or operating any such taxicab be in
any manner limited or changed in connection with this subchapter or such permit
or insurance.
('68 Code, § 28-13) (Ord. 4-1974-16, passed 4-9-74)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.04 PAYMENT OF AD VALOREM TAX ON TAXICABS.
   Before any permit or renewal of a permit to operate a taxicab in the city
shall be issued, the City Secretary shall examine the tax records and ascertain
whether or not ad valorem taxes assessed by the city against the vehicle and
other equipment to be used in the business of the applicant have been fully
paid. If the ad valorem taxes have not been paid, the City Secretary shall
refuse to issue the applicant such permit or renewal until all of the ad
valorem taxes have been paid and all other provisions of this subchapter have
been complied with by applicant, and the City Secretary shall issue to the
applicant a permit or renewal thereof for each and every vehicle to which he
may be entitled.
('68 Code, § 28-14) (Ord. 4-1974-16, passed 4-9-74)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.05 RENDERING TAXICABS FOR AD VALOREM TAXES.
   It shall be the duty of every owner of every taxicab operated within the
city to render or cause to be rendered for ad valorem taxes to the city all
vehicles or other equipment used in such business, and a failure to render for
and to pay such ad valorem taxes to the city before they become delinquent
shall, at the will of the Council, operate as a revocation of any permit
authorizing the operation over the public streets, alleys and ways of the city
of any such taxicabs.
('68 Code, § 28-15) (Ord. 4-1974-16, passed 4-9-74)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.06 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMITS; RECORD.
   (A)   The Council, on complaint filed by any person against an owner of a
taxicab charging violation of any of the terms of this subchapter or any code
provision or any other ordinance of the city or laws of the state regulating
motor vehicles, may, after giving five days' notice of the ground of the
complaint to such permit holder against whom complaint is made, hear evidence
of such complaint, and after such hearing the Council may revoke or suspend the
permit of such owner for good causes shown regardless of whether the permit
holder has been charged or convicted in a court on such charge.
   (B)   Whenever any person holding one or more permits for taxicabs shall,
for a period of 15 days consecutively, fail to make reasonable and consistent
effort to operate such taxicabs for any reason other than an emergency over
which the permit holder or owner has no control, the Council shall, upon
hearing and after five days' notice to the owner or permit holder, revoke all
permits covering such taxicabs not in use. The City Secretary shall keep a
complete record of each taxicab permit issued and all renewals and revocations
thereof.
('68 Code, § 28-16) (Ord. 4-1974-16, passed 4-9-74)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.07 FRANCHISE FEE; PERMIT CARD.
   A fee of $100 shall be paid to the city by the owners of the taxicab
franchise and an additional fee of $25 per cab per year shall be paid on or
before January 1 of each year. Upon payment of said fee, a permit card shall be
issued to each taxicab, and the permit card shall be displayed conspicuously in
the taxicab. The permit card shall contain a number and said number shall be
placed or displayed on the inside of every taxicab.
('68 Code, § 28-17) (Ord. 4-1974-16, passed 4-9-74)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.08 IDENTIFICATION OF TAXI.
   Every taxicab shall have affixed on both sides and on rear of the cab the
name of the owner or the assumed name under which the owner operates, together
with the company's telephone number and the cab permit number. All of the
lettering mentioned in this section shall not be less than four inches in
height and not less than one inch in width and will be of suitable material
that will weather the elements; and such lettering must be kept legible at all
times.
('68 Code, § 28-18) (Ord. 4-1974-16, passed 4-9-74)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.09 TAXIMETERS AND RATES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating, driving or in
charge of any taxicab to operate or drive such taxicab unless such taxicab is
equipped with a taximeter and such taximeter is used to determine the fare to
be charged which is recorded on the reading face of such taximeter for any
trips; and no other rates or methods of measuring the distance or time charges
shall be allowed except by taximeter as herein provided except the holder may
authorize the driver of a taxicab to make the flat rate charges for trips
between the city and other incorporated municipalities within the metropolitan
area in accordance with the flat rate fare posted in such taxicab. However, the
taximeter shall be in operation at all times when the taxicab is within the
city.
   (B)   Every taxicab having affixed thereto a taximeter shall use a taximeter
of a size and design approved by the chief of police and such taximeter shall
conform to the following specifications:
      (1)   The taximeter shall be a mechanical instrument or device by which
the charge for hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated for distance
traveled, for waiting time, if any, and upon which much charge or charges shall
be indicated by means of clearly legible figures which are electrically lighted
each time the taximeter flag is thrown from the nonearning to earning position.
      (2)   Every taximeter must register upon visual counters the following
items:
         (a)   Total miles, unless shown by accurate registration on the
speedometer, tested and in good working order, on the taxicab.
         (b)   Paid miles.
         (c)   Number of units.
         (d)   Number of trips.
      (3)   Each taximeter must be furnished with a tamper-proof switch and
system of electrical distribution so that when the taximeter flag is in the
“high” or nonearning position, the cruising light or lights will be
automatically lighted, between sunset and sunrise, and when. the taximeter flag
is on “mileage” or “time,” both of which are earning positions an amber “tell-
tale” light of the top light will be automatically lighted at all times.
Provided that any taxicab not having a taximeter at the time of the passage of
this subchapter [i.e., April 9, 1974] be given time to install these no later
than June 1, 1974.
   (C)   A current schedule of all rates and fares charged by the owner shall
always be on file with the City Secretary. The holder may from time to time
propose changes in those rates and fares by filing such proposed rates and
fares with the City Secretary for consideration of the City Council and left on
file for a period of 15 days. If, within that period, the same have been
approved or have not been acted upon by the City Council, in whole or in part,
the whole or part so approved, or so not acted upon shall take effect, as
proposed; provided, however, the City Council shall have the right, by
resolution duly passed, to extend the time for action upon such proposed
changes in rates or fares for a reasonable time, and, in such case, the City
Council shall give the holder notice of having ordered such extension prior to
the end of the 15-day period.
   (D)   No person owning, operating, driving or in charge of any taxicab
within the city shall demand or charge any rate or fare other than that filed
with the City Secretary.
   (E)   There shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the inside of each
taxicab and on the back of the front seat a card showing the rates charged by
the taxicab. A failure to have such card so posted at all times is a violation
of this subchapter and may subject the permit to revocation at the will of the
Council.
   (F)   (1)   The following fares shall be charged by all taxicabs operating
in the city:
      For the first one-fifth mile   $ 1.25
      For each additional one-fifth mile   0.10
      For waiting time (per hour)   6.00
      For each additional passenger over one   0.25
      Minimum fare   1.25
      (2)   No charge shall be made by the driver of any taxicab for waiting
time of five minutes or less. Hourly and daily rates for extraordinary services
shall be mutually agreed upon by the driver and passenger in advance upon terms
satisfactory to them. It shall be unlawful for any driver or owner or refuse or
avoid a call or to refuse or avoid picking up a passenger coming from any
distant section of the city because of excessive distance in relation to the
amount charged, or for any other reason, and such refusal shall be a violation
of this subchapter and subject the owner toe revocation of the franchise within
the discretion of the City Council.
('68 Code, § 28-19) (Ord. 4-1974-16, passed 4-9-74; Am. Ord. 4-1975-11, passed
4-8-75; Am. Ord. 5-1976-18, passed 5-11-76; Am. Ord. 10-1976-6, passed 12-19-
76; Am. Ord. 6-1978-28, passed 6-13-78)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.10 SERVICE REQUIRED. 
   Any person operating a taxicab business shall maintain service from 6:00 am.
to 9:00 p.m. daily.
('68 Code, § 28-20) (Ord. 4-1974-1, passed 4-9-74; Am. Ord. 4-1975-11, passed
4-8-75; Am. Ord. 6-1978-28, passed 6-13-78)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.11 TAXICAB INSPECTORS AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Every taxicab operating under this chapter shall be inspected
periodically by the Chief of Police or Inspector appointed by the Chief of
Police at such intervals as shall be established by the Chief of Police to
insure the continued maintenance of safe operating conditions. Every vehicle
operating under this chapter shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
If any taxicab is found to be unsafe, unsanitary or unsightly, the Taxicab
Inspector may direct that the vehicle be taken out of service until made safe,
sanitary and presents a neat appearance. Such taxicabs taken out of service
must be inspected and approved by the Chief of Police before being returned to
service.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every holder to have any or all taxicabs
operated by him at any designated; place and at such times as may be specified
by the Police Chief or the Supervisor of Weights and Measures, for the purpose
of testing taximeters or checking mechanical and sanitary conditions of the
taxicabs. Failure to produce taxicabs for such testing or checking will be
sufficient grounds for taking vehicles out of service until they have been
checked, and taximeter tested and sealed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. The cost of any tests and examinations shall be borne by the
owner.
('68 Code, § 28-21) (Ord. 4-1974-16, passed 4-9-74)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.12 RECORDS OF TAXISTAND OWNERS; FURNISHING INFORMATION RELATIVE TO
ACCIDENTS AND CRIMES.
   (A)   Every owner of a taxistand shall keep accurate records relating to
calls received and services rendered, the time of such calls or services, the
name of the driver performing the service or making the service call, the place
of such call and the time of return from such call; and every owner shall give
access to any and all records kept to the Chief of Police or any member of the
police force; and any and every refusal to give such records or furnish
information kept regarding such matters shall be and is hereby made a
misdemeanor.
   (B)   Every owner and/or employee required to furnish information to the
Police Department with reference to the reporting of accidents and crimes
witnessed or brought to the attention of said owner and/or employee and anyone
failing to cooperate with any investigation or committing any offense in
violation of this code of ordinances or any other applicable ordinance of the
city, state or federal laws shall subject the owner and/or employee to
revocation of the permit.
('68 Code, § 28-22) (Ord. 4-1974-16, passed 4-9-74)
Penalty, see § 117.99
BUSES
§ 117.35 PERMIT.
   No person shall operate any motor bus over a designated route or on a fixed
schedule within the city without first obtaining a permit so to do from the
City Clerk. Such permit shall be applied for and issued in the same manner as
provided in §
117.02, relating to a permit to conduct a taxicab business, and the applicant
shall be subject to all of the provisions of §
117.02. Each such permit shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance.
('68 Code, § 28-40)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.36 ESTABLISHMENT OF ROUTES.
   Whenever any permit is issued under §
117.35, the City Manager shall establish the routes to be followed by such
motor bus.
('68 Code, § 28-41)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.37 STREET RENTAL CHARGE.
   The 2% gross receipts street rental charge, as generally provided for in §
117.05, shall apply to any bus operated within the city over a designated route
or on a given schedule, and the operator of any such bus shall make monthly
reports and remittances to the City Clerk.
('68 Code, § 28-42)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
other penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty provision set forth
in §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this §§
117.01 through 117.22 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine to not exceed $500, and each day such violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense; the Council may, in addition to the
penalty herein prescribed, revoke the permit to operate any taxicab so
involved. Each act done in violation of this subchapter or any provision
thereof shall constitute a separate offense and upon conviction be punishable
as such.
('68 Code, § 28-23) (Ord. 4-1974-16, passed 4-9-74; Am. Ord. 7-1991-21, passed
7-25-91)
CHAPTER 118: OIL AND GAS DRILLING; MINERAL EXPLORATION
Section
   
118.01   Definitions
   
118.02   Permits required
   
118.03   Permit application and filing fee; notice of application
   
118.04   Well setbacks
   
118.05   Permits; issuance or refusal to issue
   
118.06   Bond and insurance
   
118.07   Suspension or termination of permit; effect
   
118.08   Amended permits
   
118.085   Transfer of gas well permits
   
118.09   Use of streets and alleys
   
118.10   Streets and alleys; obstructions; permits
   
118.11   Private roads and drill sites
   
118.12   Drilling rigs; removal; watchmen
   
118.13   Operations and equipment; practices and standards
   
118.14   Cleanliness and sanitation
   
118.15   Storage tanks and separators; types and requirements
   
118.16   Fences, walls, gates and landscaping required
   
118.17   Fire prevention; escape of gas; burning; flaring; general requirements
   
118.18   Flow lines and gathering lines
   
118.19   Periodic reports
   
118.20   Appeals
 
   
118.98   Violations
   
118.99   Penalty
§ 118.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ABANDONMENT. As defined by the Texas Railroad Commission, includes the
plugging of the well and the restoration of any well site as required by this
chapter.
      AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL. The all encompassing noise level associated with a
given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources at the
location, constituting the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a
given location.
      BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy. The term BUILDING shall be construed as if followed by the
words “or portions thereof.”
      CITY. The City of Cleburne, Texas.
      CITY OFFICIAL. The City Manager of the City of Cleburne or any duly
authorized representative of the City Manager.
      CLOSED LOOP MUD SYSTEM. A system utilized while drilling so that reserve
pits are not used and, instead, steel bins are used to collect all drilling
waste.
      COMMERCIAL BUILDING.  A building located in a commercial district.
      COMMERCIAL DISTRICT. A commercial district as defined in
Chapter 155, Zoning.
      COMMISSION. The Texas Railroad Commission.
      COMPLETION OF DRILLING, RE-DRILLING AND RE-WORKING.  The date the work is
completed for the drilling, re-drilling or re-working, and the crew is released
by completing their work or contract, or by their employer.
      DECIBEL (db). A unit for measuring the intensity of a sound/noise, equal
to 10 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the measured sound
pressure squared to a reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals.
      DERRICK.  Any portable framework, tower, mast and/or structure required
or used in connection with drilling or re-working a well for the production of
oil or gas.
      DRILL SITE. The premises used during the drilling or re-working of a well
or wells located thereon, and during the subsequent life of a well or wells or
any associated operation.
      DRILLING. Digging or boring a new well for the purpose of exploring for,
developing or producing petroleum, gas or other hydrocarbons, or for the
purpose of injecting gas, water or any other fluid or substance into the earth.
      DRILLING EQUIPMENT. The derrick, together with all parts of and
appurtenances to such structure, every piece of apparatus, machinery or
equipment used or erected or maintained for use in connection with drilling.
      GAS. Any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, produced in a
natural state from the earth, and which maintains a gaseous or rarefied state
in standard temperature and pressure conditions, and/or the gaseous components
or vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or natural gas.
      GAS WELL. Any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or
actual production of natural gas.
      HIGH TRAFFIC AREAS. Any area on the pad site, lease road or production
site that is used or can be used by vehicles and equipment.
      INDUSTRIAL BUILDING. A building located in an industrial district.
      INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT. An industrial district or manufacturing district as
defined in Chapter 155, Zoning.
      OPERATION SITE.  The area used for development, production and all
operational activities associated with oil or gas after drilling activities are
complete.
      OPERATOR. For each well, the person listed on the Railroad Commission
Form W-1 or Form P-4 for an oil or gas well that is, or will be, actually in
charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping or
controlling any well, including without limitation, a unit OPERATOR. If the
OPERATOR, as herein defined, is not the lessee under an oil or gas lease of any
premises affected by the provisions of this chapter, then such lessee shall
also be deemed to be an OPERATOR. In the event that there is no oil or gas
lease relating to any premises affected by this chapter, the owner of the fee
mineral estate in the premises shall be deemed an OPERATOR.
      PERSON. Any natural person, corporation, association, partnership,
receiver, trustee, guardian, executor, administrator and a fiduciary or
representative of any kind.
      PROPERTY OWNER. Real property surface record owner(s).
      PROTECTED USE. A residence, commercial building, religious institution,
public building, hospital building, school, public park or an approved
preliminary or final platted residential subdivision.
      PUBLIC BUILDING. All buildings used, or designed and intended to be used,
for the purpose of assembly of persons for such purposes as deliberation,
entertainment, amusement or health care. Public buildings include, but shall
not be limited to, theaters, assembly halls, auditoriums, armories, mortuary
chapels, dance halls, exhibition halls, museums, gymnasiums, bowling lanes,
libraries, skating rinks, courtrooms, restaurants and hospitals.
      PUBLIC PARK. Any land area dedicated to and/or maintained by the city for
traditional park-like recreation purposes, but shall not include publicly or
privately owned golf courses, or privately owned amusement parks.
      RE-DRILL. Re-completion of an existing well by deepening or sidetrack
operations extending more than 150 feet from the existing well bore.
      RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. Any building in which persons regularly assemble
for religious worship, and activities intended primarily for purposes connected
with such worship, or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.
      RESIDENCE. A house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, mobile
home or other building designed for dwelling purposes, including those for
which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for a
permit for mineral exploration or the drilling of a well is filed with the
city.
      RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. A residential district as defined in
Chapter 155, Zoning.
      RE-WORKING.  Re-completion or re-entry of an existing well within the
exiting bore hole, or by deepening or sidetrack operations that do not extend
more than 150 feet from the existing well bore, or replacement of well liners
or casings.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. All public rights-of-way or streets or other public
property within the city.
      SCHOOL. Any public or private primary and secondary education facility
providing education up through and including the twelfth grade level, and any
LICENSED DAY CARE CENTER, meaning a facility licensed by the state or the city
that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for
more than six children under 14 years of age, and for less than 24 hours a day.
      STREET. Any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking
area, or other public right-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
      TANK. A container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with the
drilling or production of gas or other hydrocarbons for holding or storing
fluids.
      WELL. Any hole or holes, bore or bores, to any sand, horizon, formation,
strata or depth for the purpose of producing any oil, gas, liquid hydrocarbon,
brine water, sulphur water, or for the use as an injection well for secondary
recovery, disposal or production of gas or other hydrocarbons from the earth.
      WELL BORE.  The hole made when a well is drilled.
      WORKOVER OPERATIONS.  Work performed in a well after its completion in an
effort to secure production where there has been none, or to restore production
that has ceased, or to increase production.
   (B)   All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and
not specifically defined shall have that meaning customarily attributable
thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry.
('68 Code, § 19½-1) (Ord. 10-1987-55, passed 10-20-87; Am. Ord. 01-2007-07,
passed 1-23-07; Am. Ord. 06-2011-32, passed 6-28-11)
§ 118.02 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   A person wanting to engage and operate in oil or gas production
activities shall apply for and obtain a permit under this chapter, indicating
in the application the type of permit being requested. It shall be unlawful for
any person acting either for him- or herself, or as an agent, employee,
independent contractor, or servant for any person, to drill any well, assist in
any way in the site preparation, re-working, fracturing or operation of any
such well, or to conduct any activity related to the production of oil or gas,
without first obtaining a permit issued by the city in accordance with the
terms of this chapter.
   (B)   The operator must apply for and obtain a permit for the drilling, re-
drilling, deepening, re-entering, activating or converting of each well.
   (C)   A permit shall not constitute authority for the re-entering and
drilling of an abandoned well. In accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, an operator shall obtain a new permit if the operator is re-entering
and drilling an abandoned well.
   (D)   When a permit has been issued to the operator for the drilling, re-
drilling, deepening, re-entering, activating or converting of a well, such
permit shall constitute sufficient authority for drilling, operation,
production gathering or production maintenance, repair, re-working, testing,
plugging and abandonment of the well, and/or any other activity associated with
mineral exploration at the site of such well; provided, however, that a new or
supplemental permit shall be obtained before such well may be reworked for
purposes of re-drilling, deepening or converting it to a depth or use other
than that set forth in the then current permit for such well.
   (E)   Any person who intends to re-work a permitted well using a drilling
rig, to fracture stimulate a permitted well after initial completion, or to
conduct seismic surveys or other exploration activities, shall give written
notice to the City Manager no less than ten days before the activities begin.
The notice must identify where the activities will be conducted, and must
describe the activities in detail, including whether explosive charges will be
used, the duration of the activities, and the time the activities will be
conducted. The notice must also provide the address and 24-hour phone number of
the person conducting the activities. If requested by the City Manager, the
person conducting the activities will post a sign on the property giving the
public notice of the activities, including the name, address and 24-hour phone
number of the person conducting the activities.
   (F)   A permit shall automatically terminate, unless extended, if drilling
is not commenced within 180 days from the date of the issuance of the permit. A
permit may be extended by the City Manager for an additional 180 days, upon
request by the operator and proof that the classification of the requested
permit for such location has not changed. Permit extension must be requested
prior to the expiration of the original permit. A permit extension fee of
$2,500 must accompany the extension request.
   (G)   The permits required by this chapter are in addition to, and are not
in lieu of, any permit which may be required by any other provision of this
code or by any other governmental agency.
   (H)   No additional permit or filing fees shall be required for:
      (1)   Any wells, existing, previously permitted or approved by the city,
within the corporate limits of the city on the effective date of this section;
or
      (2)   Any wells on which drilling has commenced on the effective date of
this section; or
      (3)   Any wells in existence or any wells on which drilling has commenced
on land annexed into the city after the effective date of this section; or
      (4)   Any well that was planned for the land before the 90th day before
the effective date of its annexation, and one or more licenses, certificates,
permits, approvals, or other forms of authorization by a governmental entity
were required by law for such well, and the completed application for the
initial authorization was filed before the date the annexation proceedings were
instituted.
      A person shall have 45 days after the effective date of this section or
annexation into the city to designate a gas operation as a preexisting
operation, by filing with the City Manager a site plan drawn to scale, showing
the proposed location of the well with respect to survey lines, and the
proposed associated production facilities, if any.
   (I)   No permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any
floodway.
   (J)   By acceptance of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the
operator expressly stipulates and agrees to be bound by and comply with the
provisions of this chapter. The terms of this chapter shall be deemed to be
incorporated in any permit issued pursuant to it, with the same force and
effect as if this chapter was set forth verbatim in such permit.
('68 Code, § 19½-2) (Ord. 10-1987-55, passed 10-20-87; Am. Ord. 8-2002-58,
passed 8-27-02; Am. Ord. 01-2007-07, passed 1-23-07; Am. Ord. 06-2011-32,
passed 6-28-11) Penalty, see
§ 118.99
§ 118.03 PERMIT APPLICATION AND FILING FEE; NOTICE OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every application for a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be in writing, signed by the operator, or some person duly authorized to sign
on the operator’s behalf, and filed with the City Secretary.
   (B)   Every application shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $5,000 per
well.
   (C)   The application shall include the following information:
      (1)   The date of the application and type of permit requested;
      (2)   An accurate legal description of the lease property to be used for
the oil or gas operation, the parcel and the production unit and name of the
geologic formation as used by the Commission. Property recorded by plat should
reference subdivision, block and lot numbers.
      (3)   A map showing the proposed transportation route and road for
equipment, chemicals or waste products used or produced by the oil or gas
operation.
      (4)   The proposed well name.
      (5)   The surface owner names and addresses of the lease property.
      (6)   The mineral lessee name and address.
      (7)   The operator/applicant name and address, and if the operator is a
corporation, the state of incorporation, and if the operator is a partnership,
the names and addresses of the general partners.
      (8)   The name and address of the individual designated to receive
notice.
      (9)   The name and 24-hour phone number of the representative with
supervisory authority over all oil or gas operation site activities.
      (10)   The location and description of all improvements and structures
within 600 feet of the proposed drill site.
      (11)   The owner and address of each parcel of property within 600 feet
of the proposed drill site.
      (12)   A site plan of the proposed operation site showing the location of
all improvements and equipment, including the location of the proposed well(s)
and other facilities, including but not limited to, tanks, pipelines,
compressors, separators, storage sheds, fencing and any access roads.
      (13)   The name, address and 24-hour phone number of the person to be
notified in case of an emergency.
      (14)   The exact and correct acreage of the site for the well described
in the permit application.
      (15)   The proposed hole size, casing program and cementing program.
      (16)   Copies of all reports required by the Commission.
      (17)   An original, executed, citywide road maintenance agreement, signed
and approved by the city and filed with the City Secretary, that provides that
the operator shall repair, at the operator's own expense, any damage to roads,
streets, highways or other city property caused by the use of heavy vehicles
and equipment for any activity associated with the preparation, drilling,
production and operation of gas wells.
      (18)   A description of public utilities required during drilling and
operation.
      (19)   A description of the water source to be used during drilling.
      (20)   A copy of the approved Commission permit to drill, together with
attachments and survey plats applicable to the drill and operation sites.
      (21)   A written report showing the pre-drilling ambient noise level,
measured at the nearest protected use receiver/receptor's property line or 100
feet from the nearest protected use structure (as measured to the closest
exterior point of the building), whichever is closer to the receiver/receptor.
      (22)   A copy of the determination by the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ) of the depth of useable quality ground water.
      (23)   Evidence of insurance and security requirements under this
chapter.
      (24)   A statement, under oath, signed by the operator or designated
representative, that the information submitted with the application is, to the
best knowledge and belief of the operator or designated representative, true
and correct.
      (25)   All required application and permit fees.
   (D)   At least 15 days, and not more than 20 days prior to the date of
filing of the permit application, the operator shall publish a copy of a notice
as outlined below, at the operator's expense, in one issue of a daily newspaper
in the city. An affidavit by the printer or publisher of the newspaper
indicating publication of the notice shall be filed with the application, and
will be prima facie evidence of such publication. The notice shall read as
follows:
“Notice is hereby given that                           , acting under and
pursuant to the Ordinances of the City of Cleburne, Texas, on the      day of
              , 20   , intends to file with the City Secretary of the City of
Cleburne, an application for a permit to drill, complete and operate a well for
oil or gas upon property located at           , Cleburne, Johnson County,
Texas, more particularly shown on the map of record in Volume         , Page
         , Plat Records of Johnson County, Texas, or per Tax Tract Number
       , Johnson County, Texas. Additional information is available by
contacting the applicant at 817-_______.”
   (E)   At least 20 days prior to the date of the filing of the permit
application, the operator shall, at the operator's expense, erect at least one
sign, not less than three feet by three feet, upon the premises upon which a
permit has been requested. Where possible, the sign or signs shall be located
in a conspicuous place or places upon the property, at a point or points
nearest any right-of-way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare adjacent to
such property.
      (1)   The sign(s) shall substantially indicate that a permit to drill for
oil or gas will be requested, the date when the permit application will be
filed, and shall further set forth that additional information can be acquired
by telephoning the applicant at a number to be indicated on the sign.
      (2)   All signs shall remain in place until final action on the permit
application by the City Manager or the City Council, and shall then be removed
by the operator.
      (3)    The continued maintenance of any such sign shall not be deemed to
be a condition precedent to the holding of any public hearing or to any other
official action under this chapter.
   (F)   Upon substantial compliance with this section, all notice provisions
contained in this section shall be deemed sufficient.
('68 Code, § 19½-3) (Ord. 10-1987-55, passed 10-20-87; Am. Ord. 01-2007-07,
passed 1-23-07; Am. Ord. 06-2011-32, passed 6-28-11)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.04 WELL SETBACKS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to drill any well, the center of which, at
the surface of the ground, is located:
         (a)   Within 25 feet of any storage tank or source of ignition;
         (b)   Within 75 feet of any public street, road, highway or future
street, right-of-way or property line;
         (c)   Within 100 feet of any building accessory to, but not necessary
to the operation of the well;
         (d)   Within 300 feet of any fresh water well;
         (e)   Within 400 feet of any industrial building; or
         (f)   Within 600 feet of any protected use.
      (2)   This provision applies to any existing protected use or industrial
building, or where a building permit has been issued for a protected use or an
industrial building on the date the application for a permit under this chapter
is filed with the city.
   (B)   The distances referred to in §
118.04(A)(1) through (6) above shall be calculated from the well bore, in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects to the
closest exterior point of any object or boundary listed in divisions (1)
through (6) above.
   (C)   The distances set out in §
118.04(A)(5) and (6) may be reduced in accordance with  §
118.05(C), but never to less than 200 feet from a protected use or industrial
building, by:
      (1)   A waiver granted by the City Council; or
      (2)   Written notarized waivers granted by the owners of protected use
property within a 600-foot radius around the proposed well, or by the owners of
any industrial building within a 400-foot radius around the proposed well. All
waivers must identify the property address, block and lot number, subdivision
name (if applicable), plat volume and page, and must be filed, at the expense
of the operator, in the applicable county records prior to the application for
the permit.
(Ord. 01-2007-07, passed 1-23-07)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.05 PERMITS; ISSUANCE OR REFUSAL TO ISSUE.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the filing of the application for a permit, the
City Manager shall determine whether or not the application complies in all
respects with the provisions of this chapter, if the proposed drill site meets
the distance setbacks specified in §
118.04, and if the drill site is not crossed by any public streets or roads. If
the application complies with such provisions, the City Manager shall issue a
permit authorizing the drilling of the well(s) or the installation of the
facilities applied for.
   (B)   If the City Manager determines that a permit application should be
denied for reasons other than lack of a required distance setback as set out in
§
118.04 for the requested permit, the City Manager shall notify the operator in
writing of such denial, stating the reasons for the denial. Within 30 days of
the date of the written decision of the City Manager to deny the permit, the
operator may:
      (1)   Cure those conditions that caused the denial, and resubmit the
application to the City Manager for approval and issuance of the permit; or
      (2)   File an appeal to the City Council under the provisions outlined in
§ 118.22  of this chapter.
   (C)   If, however, the City Manager determines that all of the provisions of
these regulations have been complied with by the operator, but that the
proposed drill site does not meet the distance setbacks specified in §
118.04, then the City Manager shall place the application on the agenda of the
City Council, which shall hold a public hearing on such application, after
giving notice at least one time by publication in the official newspaper at
least ten days prior to the hearing, and in writing by regular United States
mail to the surface owners of real property within 600 feet of the proposed
drill site. Such notice is not necessary to any property owner within the 600-
foot radius that executes and files with the City Secretary a written waiver
acknowledged before a notary public, as specified in  §
 118.04.
   (D)   Written notices may be served by depositing the same, properly
addressed and postage paid, in the city post office to the owners at the
addresses as shown on the last approved city tax roll, or as shown in the
application pursuant to §
118.03(C) if the latter is different from the tax roll.
   (E)   The City Council shall review the application and any other related
information. The City Council shall consider the following in deciding whether
to grant a permit:
       (1)   Whether the operations proposed are reasonable under the
circumstances and conditions prevailing in the area, considering the particular
location and the character of the improvements located there;
      (2)   Whether the drilling of such wells would conflict with the orderly
growth and development of the city;
      (3)   Whether there are other alternative well site locations;
      (4)   Whether the operations proposed are consistent with the health,
safety and welfare of the public, when and if conducted in accordance with the
permit conditions to be imposed;
      (5)   Whether there is accessible access for the city fire personnel and
firefighting equipment; and
      (6)   Whether the impact upon the adjacent property and the general
public by operations conducted in compliance with the conditions of the
proposed permit are reasonable and justified, balancing the following factors:
         (a)   The right of the owners(s) of the mineral estate to explore,
develop and produce the minerals; and
         (b)   The availability of alternative drill sites.
   (F)   Following the public hearing, the City Council may grant the permit
upon such terms and conditions as it determines to be necessary to protect the
public health and safety. The requirement for the well to be 600 feet from a
protected use or 400 feet from an industrial building may be reduced, but never
to less than 200 feet by: (1) a waiver granted by the City Council; or (2)
written notarized waivers granted by all protected use property owners within
600 feet, or written notarized waivers granted by all industrial building
owners within 400 feet, in accordance with §
118.04. For the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, the City
Council may impose additional requirements for a reduction of such distance
setbacks.
   (G)   The burden of proof on all matters considered at the hearing shall be
upon the applicant/operator.
   (H)   The City Council may require an increase in the distance the well is
set back from any protected use or industrial building, or require any change
in the operation, plan, design, layout, or on-site and technical regulations of
this chapter, including fencing, screening, landscaping, lighting, delivery
times, noise levels, tank height, or any other matters reasonably required by
the public interest.
   (I)   In the interest of securing compliance with this chapter, the city
code, and/or to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community, the
City Council may accept, reject or modify the application. In making its
decision, the City Council shall have the power and authority to refuse any
permit to drill any well at any particular location within the city, when by
reason of such particular location and other characteristics, the drilling of
such well at such particular location would be injurious to the health, safety
or welfare of the inhabitants in the immediate area of the city. The decision
of the City Council shall be final.
   (J)   Each permit shall:
      (1)   By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of this
chapter with the same force and effect as if this chapter were copied verbatim
in such permit.
      (2)   Specify the location of the proposed drill site, well or injection
facility, with particularity to lot number, block number, name of addition or
subdivision or by a metes and bounds description, or other available correct
legal description.
      (3)   Specify the routes and roads to be used by vehicles, equipment,
chemicals or waste products used or produced in oil or gas well drilling or
operations, and in servicing wells.
      (4)   Contain and specify that the term of the permit shall automatically
terminate, unless extended, if drilling is not commenced within 180 days from
the date of the permit, and so long thereafter as oil and gas is produced, or
until such time as the permittee has permanently abandoned the operation of
such well or facility for which the permit was issued.
      (5)   Contain and specify such other terms and provisions as may be
necessary in a particular case to accomplish the purpose of this chapter.
      (6)   Contain and specify that no actual operations shall be commenced
until the operator has complied with the bond and insurance provisions of this
chapter.
      (7)    Require that the operator promptly restore to its former condition
any public property damaged by the oil or gas operation.
      (8)   Pursuant to this chapter, each permit issued by the City Manager or
the City Council shall include the following language:
“Operator does hereby expressly release and discharge all claims, demands,
actions, judgments and executions it ever had, or now has or may have, or
assigns it may have or claim to have, against the City of Cleburne and/or its
departments, agents, officers, servants, successors, assigns, sponsors,
volunteers or employees, created by, or arising out of personal injuries, known
or unknown, and injuries to property, real or personal, or in any way
incidental to or in connection with the performance of the work performed by
the operator under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. The operator shall
fully defend, protect, indemnify and hold harmless the City of Cleburne, Texas,
its departments, agents, officers, servants, employees, successors, assigns,
sponsors or volunteers, from and against each and every claim, demand or cause
of action, and any and all liability, damages, obligations, judgments, losses,
fines, penalties, costs, fees and expenses incurred in defense of the City of
Cleburne, Texas, its departments, agents, officers, servants or employees,
including without limitation, personal injuries and death in connection
therewith, which may be made or asserted by operator, its agents, assigns or
any third parties on account of, arising out of, or in any way incidental to or
in connection with the performance of the work performed by the operator under
a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. The operator agrees to indemnify and
hold harmless the City of Cleburne, Texas, its departments, officers, agents,
servants, employees, successors, assigns, sponsors or volunteers, from any
liabilities or damages suffered as a result of claims, demands, costs or
judgments against the city, its departments, its officers, agents, servants or
employees, created by, or arising out of the acts or omissions of the City of
Cleburne occurring on the drill site or operation site in the course and scope
of inspecting and permitting the gas wells, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
CLAIMS AND DAMAGES ARISING, IN WHOLE OR IN PART, FROM THE NEGLIGENCE OF THE
CITY OF CLEBURNE OCCURRING ON THE DRILL SITE OR OPERATION SITE IN THE COURSE
AND SCOPE OF INSPECTING AND PERMITTING THE GAS WELLS. IT IS UNDERSTOOD AND
AGREED THAT THE INDEMNITY PROVIDED FOR IN THIS SECTION IS AN INDEMNITY EXTENDED
BY THE OPERATOR TO INDEMNIFY AND PROTECT THE CITY OF CLEBURNE, TEXAS AND/OR ITS
DEPARTMENT, AGENTS, OFFICERS, SERVANTS OR EMPLOYEES FROM THE CONSEQUENCES OF
THE NEGLIGENCE OF THE CITY OF CLEBURNE, TEXAS, AND/OR ITS DEPARTMENTS, AGENTS,
OFFICERS, SERVANTS, OR EMPLOYEES, WHETHER THAT NEGLIGENCE IS THE SOLE OR
CONTRIBUTING CAUSE OF THE RESULTANT INJURY, DEATH AND/OR DAMAGE.”
   (K)   Within 15 days after the City Manager or the City Council has granted
a permit, the City Secretary shall publish a notice of the granting of such
permit one time in the official newspaper of the city.
('68 Code, § 19½-4) (Ord. 10-1987-55, passed 10-20-87; Am. Ord. 8-2002-58,
passed 8-27-02; Am. Ord. 01-2007-07, passed 1-23-07; Am. Ord. 06-2011-32,
passed 6-28-11)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.06 BOND AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of a gas well permit the operator shall provide
the city with a security instrument in the form of a bond as follows:
      (1)   A bond shall be executed by a reliable bonding or insurance
institution authorized to do business in Texas, acceptable to the city. The
bond shall become effective on or before the date the gas well permit is issued
and shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six months after
the expiration of the gas well permit term or until the well is plugged and
abandoned and the site is restored, whichever occurs first. The operator shall
be listed as principal and the instrument shall run to the city, as obligee,
and shall be conditioned that the operator will comply with the terms and
regulations of this division (A) and the gas well permit, and further
conditioned that the operator will repair any damages to the city roads,
streets, or utilities, as determined by the Director of Public Works of the
city, caused by the use of heavy vehicles and equipment for any activity
associated with the preparation, drilling, fracing, production, and operation
of gas wells.
      (2)   The principal amount of any security instrument shall be $50,000
for any single well. During reworking operations, the amount of the bond shall
be maintained at $50,000.
      (3)   An operator drilling or reworking between one and five wells at any
given time, may elect to provide a blanket bond, in the principal minimum
amount of $150,000. If the operator drills or reworks more than five wells at a
time, the blanket bond shall be increased in increments of $50,000 per each
additional well. Once the wells are in the producing stage and all drilling
operations have ceased, the operator may elect to submit a request to the City
Manager for approval to reduce the existing bond and provide a blanket bond for
the remainder of the time the well produces, without reworking, as follows:
 
Number of Producing Wells Blanket Bond Amount Required
Up to 75 wells            $200,000
75 to 150 wells           $250,000
More than 150 wells       $300,000
 
   If at any time after no less than a 15 day written notice to the operator
and a public hearing, the City Council shall deem any operator's bond to be
insufficient, it may require the operator to increase the amount of the bond up
to a maximum of $350,000 per well.
      (4)   Whenever the city finds that a default has occurred in the
performance of any requirement or condition imposed by this division (A) or the
gas well permit, a written notice shall be given to the operator. Such notice
shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost and the period of time
deemed by the city to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work.
After receipt of such notice, the operator shall, within the time therein
specified, either cause or require the work to be performed, or failing to do
so, shall pay to the city 125% of the estimated cost of doing the work as set
forth in the notice. In no event, however, shall the cure period be less than
30 days unless in the sole opinion of the Director of Public Works the failure
presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or
unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide periodic reports
as required by this division (A). The city shall be authorized to draw against
any bond to recover such amount due from the operator. Upon receipt of such
monies, the city shall proceed by such mode as deemed convenient to cause the
required work to be performed and completed, but no liability shall be incurred
other than for the expenditure of said sum in hand. In the event that the well
has not been properly abandoned under the regulations of the Commission, such
additional money may be demanded from the operator as is necessary to properly
plug and abandon the well and restore the drill site in conformity with the
regulations of this division (A).
      (5)   In the event the operator does not cause the work to be performed
and fails or refuses to pay over to the city the estimated cost of the work to
be done as set forth in the notice, or the issuer of the security instrument
refuses to honor any draft by the city against the applicable bond, the city
may proceed to obtain compliance and abate the default by way of civil action
against the operator, or by criminal action against the operator, or by both
such methods.
      (6)   When the well or wells covered by said bond have been properly
abandoned in conformity with all regulations of this division (A), and in
conformity with all regulations of the Commission and notice to that effect has
been received by the city, or upon receipt of a satisfactory substitute, the
bond issued in compliance with these regulations shall be terminated and
cancelled.
   (B)   In addition to the bond required above, the operator shall carry a
policy or policies of standard comprehensive public liability insurance,
including contractual liability coverage, for accidental death, bodily injury
and property damage, naming both the operator and city as insureds, with an
insurance company authorized to do business in the state and appearing on the
list of authorized insurance companies prepared by the State Board of
Insurance. Such policy or policies in the aggregate shall provide for the
following minimum coverages:
      (1)   Accidental death or bodily injury, $5,000,000 one person and
$5,000,000 total for one accident;
      (2)   Property damage, $1,000,000 total for one accident.
   (C)   The operator shall file with the City Secretary a certificate of
insurance, showing compliance with the above, prior to receiving a copy or
copies of the permit or commencing any operations on the drill site. The
insurance shall not be canceled without written notice to the City Secretary at
least ten days prior to the effective date of such cancellation. In the event
such insurance is canceled, the permit granted in connection with such policy
or policies shall be suspended and ineffective until the operator files
additional insurance as provided herein.
('68 Code, § 19½-5) (Ord. 10-1987-55, passed 10-20-87; Am. Ord. 01-2007-07,
passed 1-23-07; Am. Ord. 06-2011-32, passed 6-28-11; Am. Ord. 08-2011-42,
passed 8-9-11)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.07 SUSPENSION OR TERMINATION OF PERMIT; EFFECT.
   (A)   If an operator (or its officers, employees, agents, contractors or
representatives) fails to comply with any requirement of a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter (including any requirement incorporated by reference
as part of the permit), the City Manager shall give written notice to the
operator, specifying the nature of the failure and giving the operator a
reasonable time to cure, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the
failure, the extent of the efforts required to cure, and the potential impact
on the health, safety and welfare of the community. In no event, however, shall
the cure period be less than 30 days, unless the failure presents a risk of
imminent destruction of property or injury to persons, or involves the
operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required by this chapter.
   (B)   If the operator fails to correct the noncompliance within 30 days from
the date of the notice, the City Manager may suspend or revoke the permit
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   No person shall carry on any operations performed under the terms of
the permit issued under this chapter during any period of any permit suspension
or revocation, or pending a review of the decision or order of the city in
suspending or revoking the permit. Nothing contained herein shall be construed
to prevent the necessary, diligent and bona fide efforts to cure and remedy the
default or violation for which the suspension or revocation of the permit was
ordered for the safety of persons or as required by the Commission.
   (D)   If the operator does not cure the noncompliance within the time
specified in this chapter, the City Manager, upon written notice to the
operator, may notify the Commission and request that it take any appropriate
action.
   (E)   Within 30 days of the date of the decision of the City Manager, in
writing, to suspend or revoke a permit, the operator may file an appeal to the
City Council under the provisions outlined in §
118.20 of this chapter.
   (F)   If an application for a permit is denied by the City Manager, nothing
contained herein shall prevent a new permit application from being submitted to
the City Manager for the same well.
('68 Code, § 19½-6) (Ord. 10-1987-55, passed 10-20-87; Am. Ord. 01-2007-07,
passed 1-23-07)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.08 AMENDED PERMITS.
   (A)   An operator may submit an application to the City Secretary to amend
an existing permit, to commence drilling from a new drill site that is not
shown on (or incorporated by reference as part of) the existing permit, to
relocate a drill site or operation site that is shown on (or incorporated by
reference as part of) the existing permit, or to otherwise amend the existing
permit.
   (B)   Applications for amended permits shall be in writing and signed by the
operator, and shall include the following:
      (1)   The fee for filing the application to amend the permit in the
amount of $2,500;
      (2)   A description of the proposed amendments;
      (3)   Any changes to the information submitted with the application for
the existing permit (if such information has not previously been provided to
the city);
      (4)   Such additional information as is reasonably required by the City
Manager to demonstrate compliance with the applicable permit; and
      (5)   Such additional information as is reasonably required by the City
Manager to prevent imminent destruction of property or injury to persons.
   (C)   All applications for amended permits filed with the City Secretary
shall be forwarded to the City Manager for review. Incomplete applications may
be returned to the applicant, in which case the city shall provide a written
explanation of the deficiencies; however, the city shall retain the application
fee. The city may return any application as incomplete if there is a dispute
pending before the Railroad Commission regarding the determination of the
operator.
   (D)   If the activities proposed by the amendment are not materially
different from the activities covered by the existing permit, and if the
proposed activities are in conformance with the applicable permit, then the
City Manager shall approve the amendment within ten days after the application
is filed.
   (E)   If the activities proposed by the amendment are materially different
from the activities covered by the existing permit, and if the proposed
activities are in conformance with the applicable permit, then the City Manager
shall approve the amendment within 30 days after the application is filed. If,
however, the activities proposed by the amendment are materially different and,
in the judgment of the City Manager, might create a risk of imminent
destruction of property or injury to persons not associated with the activities
covered by the existing permit, or not otherwise taken into consideration by
the existing permit, the City Manager may require the amendment to be processed
as a new permit application.
   (F)   The failure of the City Manager to review and issue an amended permit
within the time limits specified above shall not cause the application for the
amended permit to be deemed approved.
   (G)   The decision of the City Manager to deny an amendment to a permit
shall be provided to the operator in writing, within ten days after the
decision, including an explanation of the basis for the decision. The operator
may appeal any such denial to the City Council.
(Ord. 01-2007-07, passed 1-23-07; Am. Ord. 06-2011-32, passed 6-28-11)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.085 TRANSFER OF GAS WELL PERMITS.
   (A)   A gas well permit may be transferred on written request by the
operator with the consent of the City Manager or designated representative if:
      (1)   The transferee agrees in writing to be bound by the terms and
conditions of the current gas well permit and road maintenance agreement;
      (2)   All information previously provided to the city in connection with
the application for the current gas well permit is updated to reflect any
changes;
      (3)   The transferee replaces or modifies all required signs to reflect
any changes; and
      (4)   The transferee provides the certificate of insurance and security
instrument required by this chapter.
   (B)   The certificate of insurance and security instrument provided by the
transferor shall be released on the expiration of six months from the date the
transferee provides a certificate of insurance and security instrument. The
transfer shall not relieve the transferor from any liability to the city
arising out of any activities conducted prior to the transfer.
   (C)   Applications for the transfer of gas well permits shall be filed with
the Oil and Gas Department. An application fee shall be charged in the amount
of $500. The fee shall cover all well heads on the pad site.
(Ord. 06-2017-36, passed 6-27-17)
§ 118.09 USE OF STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   No operator shall make any excavations for any purpose, or construct
any lines for conveyance of fuel, water or minerals on, under or through the
streets or alleys or other land of the city.
   (B)   The digging up, breaking, excavating, tunneling, undermining, breaking
up, or damaging of any street as herein defined, or leaving upon any street any
earth or other material or obstruction, shall not be permitted unless such
persons shall first have obtained written permission from the Director of
Public Works, and then only in compliance with specifications established by
him.
   (C)   An operator shall use only the approved routes and roads designated in
the permit for vehicles, equipment, chemicals or waste products used or
produced in the oil or gas well drilling or operations, or in the servicing of
wells.
   (D)   An operator shall repair, at the operator's own expense, any damage to
roads, streets, highways or other city property caused by the use of heavy
vehicles and equipment for any activity associated with the preparation,
drilling, production and operation of gas wells.
   (E)   An operator shall keep streets and thoroughfares used by the operator
in the city free from dirt, dust, mud or other debris deposited by vehicles
involved in the preparation, drilling, production, operation or servicing of
wells. The operator shall eliminate dirt, dust, mud or other debris
accumulations within two hours of notification by the city. If for safety or
other reasons, the city elects to perform the removal, the cost of such removal
shall be paid by the operator.
('68 Code, § 19½-8) (Ord. 10-1987-55, passed 10-20-87; Am. Ord. 01-2007-07,
passed 1-23-07; Am. Ord. 06-2011-32, passed 6-28-11)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.10 STREETS AND ALLEYS; OBSTRUCTIONS; PERMITS.
   No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be
drilled at any location within any of the streets or alleys of the city and/or
streets or alleys shown by the master plan of the city, and no street or alley
shall be blocked or encumbered or closed in any drilling or production
operation or for any mineral exploration, except by written permission of the
City Traffic Engineer, and then only temporarily.
('68 Code, § 19½-9) (Ord. 10-1987-55, passed 10-20-87; Am. Ord. 01-2007-07,
passed 1-23-07)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.11 PRIVATE ROADS AND DRILL SITES.
   (A)   Prior to the commencement of any drilling operations, all private
roads used for access to the drill site and the operation site must be at least
ten feet wide, have an overhead clearance of 14 feet, and be surfaced with
asphalt, asphalt millings, crushed rock, or gravel, and maintained to prevent
dust and mud. A concrete approach shall be installed at the entrance of any
access road off all streets or roadways. Applicable permits shall be obtained
from the Inspection Department. The operator shall provide a minimum of prime
coat with four-inch depth of asphalt millings from the concrete approach to the
pad site and around heavily traveled areas on the pad site or as may be
required by the Public Works Director or his designee. All mud and debris
tracked onto city streets shall be removed immediately.
   (B)   It is the operator's responsibility to make sure that such private
roads meet these requirements. In particular cases, the requirements governing
surfacing of private roads may be altered at the discretion of the City Manager
after consideration of all circumstances, including but not limited to the
following:
      (1)   The distances from public streets and highways;
      (2)   The distances from adjoining and nearby property owners whose
surface rights are not leased by the operation;
      (3)   The purpose for which the property of such owners is or may be
used;
      (4)   Topographical features;
      (5)   The nature of the soil; and
      (6)   Exposure to wind.
(Ord. 01-2007-07, passed 1-23-07; Am. Ord. 06-2011-32, passed 6-28-11)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.12 DRILLING RIGS; REMOVAL; WATCHMEN.
   (A)   The drilling rig and other structures, materials and drilling
equipment shall be removed by the operator from the premises within 30 days
from the date of completion of the well, as shown on the appropriate Railroad
Commission form, and thereafter, when necessary, such completed well shall be
served by portable rigs, which shall be removed from the premises within 15
days from the completion of the servicing operation. At all times from the
start of erection of a drilling rig, until the well is abandoned and plugged or
completed as a producer, and enclosed as herein provided, the operator shall
keep a watchman on duty on the premises at all times when the operator or other
workers are not on such premises.
   (B)   In the event that any operator is granted a permit to drill or conduct
mineral exploration within the city's corporate limits, the operator shall
proceed with the drilling operations with the highest degree of care so as not
to injure adjoining property or persons in any manner. All wastes must be
contained within the drill site, as set out hereinafter, without any subsurface
disposal. Upon the completion of such drilling operations, the grounds around
the well shall be immediately cleared of all drilling mud and/or all oil, salt
water or water, and shall be made to conform in appearance to the lands in the
neighborhood wherein such drilling operations are so conducted.
   (C)   Caliche drilling pads shall be removed within 30 days following
abandonment of the well site.
   (D)   Steel slush pits shall be used in connection with all drilling and
reworking operations. Such pits and contents shall be removed from the premises
and drill site within 30 days after completion of the well. No earthen slush
pits shall be used. However, cuttings from the drilling operations may be
disposed of on the drill site according to the following requirements:
      (1)   Disposal shall be in a pit lined with black, six-millimeter, PVC
lining material.
      (2)   Cuttings shall then be covered with not less than 24 inches of top
soil, and the surface otherwise brought back to the same level and
substantially the same appearance as the surrounding ground.
   (E)   All wells shall be abandoned in accordance with the rules of the
Commission and the provisions of this chapter. The operator abandoning a well
shall be responsible for the restoration of the well site as nearly as
practicable to its original condition. All abandoned or deserted wells or drill
sites shall meet the most current abandonment requirements of the Commission
prior to the issuance of any building permit for development of the property.
No structure shall be built over an abandoned well.
('68 Code, § 19½-10) (Ord. 10-1987-55, passed 10-20-87; Am. Ord. 01-2007-07,
passed 1-23-07; Am. Ord. 06-2011-32, passed 6-28-11)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.13 OPERATIONS AND EQUIPMENT; PRACTICES AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   All drilling and operations at any well performed by an operator under
this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the practices of a
reasonable and prudent operation in the Barnett Shale Area. All casing, valves,
blow-out preventors, drilling fluid, tubing, well head, Christmas tree, and
well head connections shall be of a type and quality consistent with such
practice. Setting and cementing casing and running drillstem tests shall be
performed in a manner and at a time consistent with the practices of a
reasonable and prudent operator. Each operator under this section shall observe
and follow the regulations of the Railroad Commission of the state. All of the
installations shall be done in accordance with accepted practices for fire
prevention purposes.
   (B)   All drilling and operations shall comply with the following noise
regulations:
      (1)   No well shall be drilled, redrilled or any equipment operated at
any location within the city in such manner so as to create any noise that
causes the exterior noise level, when measured at the nearest protected use
receiver's/receptor's property line or 100 feet from the nearest protected use
structure (as measured to the closest exterior point of the building),
whichever is closer to the receiver/receptor, that exceeds the ambient noise
level by more than five decibels during daytime hours, and more than three
decibels during nighttime hours. Fracing operations may not exceed the ambient
noise level by more than ten decibels. Backflow operations may not exceed the
ambient noise level by more than five decibels during nighttime hours.
      (2)   The operator shall be responsible for establishing and reporting to
the city the pre-drilling ambient noise level prior to the issuance of a gas
well permit. Once the drilling is complete, the operator shall be required to
establish a new ambient noise level prior to the installation of any new noise-
generation equipment.
      (3)   Adjustment to the noise standards set forth above in §
118.13(B)(1) may be permitted in accordance with the following:
 
Permitted Increase (db)                 Duration of Increase (Minutes)*
5                                       15
10                                      5
15                                      1
20                                      less than 1
*Cumulative minutes during any one hour
 
      (4)   All workover operations shall be restricted to daytime hours.
      (5)   The exterior noise level generated by the drilling, redrilling or
other operations of all gas wells located within 600 feet of a protected use
shall be continuously monitored to ensure compliance. The cost of such
monitoring shall be borne by the operator.
      (6)   Acoustical blankets, sound walls, mufflers or other alternative
methods, as approved by the City Manager, may be used to ensure compliance. All
soundproofing shall comply with accepted industry standards and shall be
subject to approval by the Fire Department.
      (7)   The sound level meter used in conducting noise evaluations shall
meet the American National Standard Institute's standard for sound meters, or
an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment that will
provide equivalent data.
      (8)   A citation shall be issued for the failure to correct the violation
within 24 hours of the notice of violation by the City Manager or his or her
designated representative.
      (9)   During nighttime operations in residential and commercial
districts, the operation of vehicle audible back-up alarms shall be prohibited
or replaced with approved, non-auditory signaling systems, such as spotters or
flagmen. Except for emergency situations, deliveries of pipe, casing and heavy
loads in such areas shall be limited to daytime hours. In such districts, the
derrick man and driller shall communicate by walkie-talkie or other
nondisruptive means, and horns may not be used to signal for connection or to
summon crew (except that a horn may be used for emergency purposes only). The
operator shall conduct onsite meetings to inform all personnel of the noise
control requirements for nighttime operations.
   (C)   Drilling operations must be conducted in such a manner that
percolating or ground water will not be adversely affected, including the
prevention of vertical movement of percolating water.
   (D)   All oil or gas drilling and production operations shall be conducted
in such a manner as to minimize dust, noise, vibration or noxious odors, and
shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices incident to drilling
for the production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances. A closed loop
mud system shall be used in conjunction with all drilling and reworking
operations on a drill site located in a residential or commercial district,
unless waived by the City Council. The production site surface shall have a
dust inhibiting surface. Asphalt millings shall be applied to all high traffic
areas, including pad site and areas where trucks turn around to exit the site.
   (E)   Except in case of emergency, no materials, equipment, tools or pipe
used for drilling or production operations shall be delivered to or removed
from the site except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any day.
On drillstem tests on a site located in such a residential or commercial
district, only one trip will be allowed at night between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., unless an emergency exists.
   (F)   Firefighting apparatus and supplies, as approved by the Fire
Department, shall be maintained on the drilling site at all times during
drilling and production operations. No refining process or any process for the
extraction of products from natural gas shall be carried on at the drill site,
except that a dehydrator and separator may be maintained on the drill site for
the separation of liquids from natural gas. Any such separator shall serve only
one well.
   (G)   All production equipment used shall be so constructed and operated
that noise, vibration, dust, odor or other harmful or annoying substances or
effect will be minimized by the operations carried on at any drilling site, or
from anything incident thereto, to the injury or annoyance of persons living in
the vicinity; nor shall the site or structures thereon be permitted to become
dilapidated, unsightly or unsafe. If capable of reducing factors of nuisance or
annoyance, proven technological improvements in methods of production shall be
adopted as they, from time to time, become available. There shall be no venting
of gas into the open air, except as allowed by the Railroad Commission in
residential areas.
   (H)   The well site, drill site, tank site, tank battery site, pump station
site, or compressor site shall not be used for the storage of pipe, equipment
or materials, except during the drilling or servicing of the well and the
production facilities allowed on the site.
   (I)   No refinery, dehydrating or absorption plant of any kind shall be
constructed, established or maintained on the premises at any time. This shall
not be deemed to exclude a simple gas separation process.
   (J)   All electric lines to production facilities shall be located in a
manner compatible to those already installed in the surrounding area or
subdivision.
   (K)   No lights located on any drill or operation site shall be directed in
such a manner that they shine directly on public roads, adjacent property or
property in the general vicinity of the drill or operation site. To the extent
practicable, and taking into account safety considerations, site lighting shall
be directed downward and internally so as to avoid glare on public roads and
adjacent dwellings and buildings within 300 feet.
   (L)   Exhaust from any internal combustion engine, stationary or mounted on
wheels, used in connection with the drilling of any well or for use on any
production equipment shall not be discharged into the open air, unless it is
equipped with an exhaust muffler or mufflers, or an exhaust muffler box
constructed of noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and
prevent the escape of noxious gases, fumes or ignited carbon or soot.
   (M)   All formation fracturing operations shall be conducted during daylight
hours, unless the operator has notified the City Manager that fracturing will
occur before or after daylight hours to meet safety requirements. The following
requirements shall apply to all fracture stimulation operations performed on a
well within 600 feet of a protected use:
      (1)   At least 48 hours before operations are commenced, the operator
shall post a sign at the entrance of the well site advising the public of the
date the operations will commence;
      (2)    “Flowback” operations to recover fluids used during fracture
stimulation shall be performed during daylight hours only, unless the City
Manager permits such operations during non-daylight hours;
      (3)   A watchman shall be required at all times during such operations;
and
      (4)   At no time shall the well be allowed to flow or vent directly to
the atmosphere without first directing the flow through separation equipment or
into a portable tank.
   (N)   Signs.
      (1)    A sign shall be immediately and prominently displayed at the gate
of the temporary and permanent site fencing erected pursuant to §
118.16 of this chapter. Such sign shall be of durable material, maintained in
good condition and, unless otherwise required by the Commission, shall have a
surface area of not less than two square feet nor more than four square feet,
and shall be lettered with the following:
         (a)   The well name and number;
         (b)   The name of the operator;
         (c)   The telephone numbers of the person responsible for the well who
may be contacted in case of emergency.
      (2)    Permanent weatherproof signs reading “DANGER NO SMOKING ALLOWED”
shall be posted immediately upon completion of the well site fencing at the
entrance of each well site and tank battery, or in any other location approved
or designated by the Fire Chief. Sign lettering shall be four inches in height,
and red on a white background or white on a red background. Each sign shall
include the emergency notification numbers of the Fire Department and the
operator, and the well and lease designations required by the Commission.
   (O)   No salt water injection or disposal wells shall be located in the
city.
   (P)   Each well must have a shutoff valve to terminate the well's
production. The Fire Department shall have access to the well site to provide
fire protection in an emergency.
   (Q)   The operator shall provide 48-hour notice to the City Manager, or his
or her designated representative, before the start of drilling and/or
fracturing operations.
('68 Code, § 19½-11) (Ord. 10-1987-55, passed 10-20-87; Am. Ord. 01-2007-07,
passed 1-23-07; Am. Ord. 06-2011-32, passed 6-28-11)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.14 CLEANLINESS AND SANITATION.
   (A)   The premises shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. The
operator shall prevent any mud, waste water, oil, slush or other waste matters
from flowing into the alleys, streets, lots or leases within the corporate
limits of the city.
   (B)   All operator premises shall be kept clear of high grass, weeds and
combustible trash within a radius of 100 feet around any oil tank, tanks or
producing wells. All waste shall be disposed of in such manner as to comply
with the air and water pollution control regulations of the state, this code
and any other applicable ordinance of the city, and removed as required in §
118.12.
('68 Code, § 19½-12) (Ord. 10-1987-55, passed 10-20-87; Am. Ord. 01-2007-07,
passed 1-23-07) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.15 STORAGE TANKS AND SEPARATORS; TYPES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to use, construct
or operate in connection with any producing well within the city limits, any
crude oil storage tanks, except to the extent of two low-type tanks for oil
storage, not exceeding a 500-barrel capacity for each well connected thereto,
or, in the alternative, low-type tanks of sufficient capacity to hold 24 hours
of production from such well; the tanks to be so constructed and maintained as
closed tanks and properly vented. An operator may use, construct and operate a
steel conventional separator, heater treater, vapor recovery unit, and such
other tanks and appurtenances as are necessary for treating oil with each of
such facilities, to be so constructed and maintained according to API
standards. Each oil/gas separator shall be equipped with both a pressure-relief
safety valve and burst plate. All such tanks shall be placed above ground, upon
a suitable earth or concrete pad.
   (B)   The use of a central tank battery is permitted so long as not more
than two tanks as specified are used for each well connected to the battery,
plus one 500-barrel water tank.
   (C)   The tanks or tanks shall be enclosed within a dike constructed of
metal or compacted earth; sufficient water shall be used during construction of
an earthen dike to assure adequate compaction. The metal or earthen dike shall
have a minimum capacity equal to two times the volume of the tanks enclosed.
   (D)   (1)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to locate a
storage tank or separator site nearer than 400 feet to any protected use, or
permanent accessory building used in connection therewith, within the city.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to locate a
storage tank site or separator site between 400 feet and 600 feet from the
nearest protected use, or permanent accessory building used in connection
therewith, within the city, without the unanimous consent of all of the
property owners within 600 feet of the site, or the affirmative vote of the
City Council cast at the time of the consideration of the drilling permit
application or at a subsequent meeting.
('68 Code, § 19½-13) (Ord. 10-1987-55, passed 10-20-87; Am. Ord. 01-2007-07,
passed 1-23-07)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.16 FENCES, WALLS, GATES AND LANDSCAPING REQUIRED.
   (A)   Fences shall not be required on drill sites during initial drilling,
completion or re-working operations as long as 24-hour on-site supervision is
provided. A secured entrance gate shall be required. All gates are to be kept
locked when the operator or its employees are not within the enclosure.
   (B)   Unless otherwise waived or approved by the City Manager, within 30
days after production has been established, the entire operation site shall be
completely enclosed by a solid masonry wall, of a minimum of eight feet but not
to exceed ten feet in height.
   (C)   Masonry walls shall comply with the following specifications:
      (1)   All walls, whether constructed onsite or prefabricated, shall be of
masonry or other like material approved by the City Manager.
      (2)   All walls used to enclose, in whole or in part, any drilling or
production site shall be constructed in accordance with standard engineering
practices, and shall meet the following specifications:
         (a)   The wall shall be of a design compatible with the facilities,
buildings and structures on and adjacent to the site; and
         (b)   The wall shall be at least eight feet in height.
   (D)   All masonry walls shall be equipped with at least one gate. The gate
shall meet the following specifications:
      (1)   Each gate shall be not less than 12 feet wide and be composed of:
two gates, each not less than six feet wide; or one sliding gate not less than
12 feet wide. If two gates are used, they shall latch and lock in the center of
the span;
       (2)   The gates shall be of chain link construction that meets the
applicable specifications, or of other approved material that, for safety
reasons, shall be at least as secure as a chain link fence;
      (3)   The gates shall be provided with a combination catch and locking
attachment device for a padlock, and shall be kept locked except when being
used for access to the site; and
      (4)   The operator must provide the Fire Chief with a “Knox Padlock” or
“Knox Box with a key” to access the well site, to be used only in case of an
emergency.
   (E)   The operator shall maintain all walls and gates in good condition at
all times. Gates must be kept securely locked when the operator or its
employees are not within the enclosure.
   (F)   When a well site is located within 1,000 feet of any protected use, or
permanent accessory building used in connection therewith, landscaping shall be
required along the masonry wall around the well site. Such landscaping shall
consist of suitable screening shrubs that complement the architectural
character of the surrounding neighborhood. Screening shrubs shall be installed
completely around the well site, a minimum of three feet in height at planting,
with the potential to grow to a mature height of a minimum of six feet, and
must have an installed irrigation system that provides total water coverage to
all plant materials. The operator shall keep the vegetation in an attractive
state and in good condition at all times. Landscape and irrigation plans shall
be submitted to the City Manager for approval.
   (G)   The requirements for a masonry wall, landscaping and an irrigation
system may be modified or waived by the City Manager, after consideration of
all of the circumstances, including but not limited to, the nature of the
surrounding land uses, and the potential impact of the well site on such
surrounding land uses if the masonry wall, landscaping and irrigation system
are not required.
('68 Code, § 19½-14) (Ord. 10-1987-55, passed 10-20-87; Am. Ord. 01-2007-07,
passed 1-23-07; Am. Ord. 06-2011-32, passed 6-28-11)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.17 FIRE PREVENTION; ESCAPE OF GAS; BURNING; FLARING; GENERAL
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any operator engaged in the drilling or operation of an oil and/or gas
well, or the operation of any facility used in conjunction with the production
of oil and/or gas within the corporate limits of the city shall take reasonable
precautions to prevent gas from escaping into the air, and shall not flare or
burn gas from a torch or any similar means within the corporate limits of the
city; provided gas may be burned for a limited time when necessary to complete
any oil and/or gas well, upon the original completion or upon the recompletion
or workover jobs upon oil and/or gas wells, so long as the same does not
constitute a fire hazard to the property of others within the vicinity of such
oil and/or gas well.
   (B)   Each operator shall fully comply with “Special Order Amending Rule 36
of the General Conservation Rules of Statewide Application State of Texas
Having Reference to Oil and Gas Operation in Hydrogen Sulfide Areas,” adopted
by the Railroad Commission of Texas, Oil and Gas Division, in Oil and Gas
Docket, No. 20-65, 354, on March 15, 1976.
('68 Code, § 19½-15) (Ord. 10-1987-55, passed 10-20-87; Am. Ord. 01-2007-07,
passed 1-23-07)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.18 FLOW LINES AND GATHERING LINES.
   (A)   Each operator shall place an identifying sign at each point where a
flow line or gas gathering line crosses any public street or road, and it shall
be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to remove, destroy or deface any
such sign.
   (B)   Each operator shall also place a warning sign at each point where a
line carrying H2S gas crosses any public street or road, and it shall be
unlawful and a misdemeanor to remove, destroy or deface any such sign.
   (C)   No operator shall make any excavation for any purposes, or construct
any lines for conveyance of fuel, water or minerals on, under or through the
streets and alleys of the city, without express permission of the City Manager,
in writing, and then only in strict compliance with this chapter and any
applicable city ordinance; provided, however, emergency repairs may be made
without such permission when, in the good faith opinion of the operator, the
delay required to obtain written permission would involve a hazard to person or
property.
   (D)   The gathering lines and flow lines hereinafter installed in the
corporate limits of the city, for the purpose of transporting oil, gas and/or
water in conjunction with the operation of any well, tank or tank battery,
injection or gathering system; are hereby limited to a maximum operating gauge
pressure of 250 psi, unless otherwise specifically approved by the City
Manager. The location of any such gathering lines and flow lines, if not
specified in the permit, must be specifically approved by the City Manager.
   (E)   The pipeline shall be tested prior to being placed in service.
   (F)   The companies responsible for any and all pipelines now existent or
hereinafter installed within the corporate limits are hereby required to
furnish the city an as-built plot plan, showing the location of all their
facilities for permanent record with the city.
   (G)   All pipelines within the corporate limits, designed or utilized to
transport oil, gas or water in connection with the production and
transportation of oil and/or gas or for repressurizing operations, shall
hereafter be installed with the minimum of cover or backfill specified by the
then applicable ASA code for such pipelines.
   (H)   The City Manager is authorized to approve a lesser cover or specify a
greater cover or backfill in special cases when, in the opinion of the City
Manager, such variation is advisable and/or will not increase the degree of
hazard.
   (I)   The requirements for construction in the public right-of-way must
conform to such city ordinances regulating such construction.
   (J)   The digging up, breaking, excavating, tunneling, undermining, breaking
up, damaging of any street as herein defined, or leaving upon any street any
earth or other material or obstruction, shall not be permitted unless such
persons shall first have obtained written permission from the City Manager;
provided, however, emergency repairs may be made without such permission when,
in the good faith opinion of the operator, the delay required to obtain the
written permission would involve a hazard to person or property.
('68 Code, § 19½-16) (Ord. 10-1987-55, passed 10-20-87; Am. Ord. 01-2007-07,
passed 1-23-07)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.19 PERIODIC REPORTS.
   (A)   The operator shall notify the City Manager of any changes to the
following information within one business week after the change occurs:
      (1)   The name, address and phone number of the operator; and
      (2)   The name, address and phone number of the person designated to
receive notices from the city (which person must a resident of Texas that can
be served in person or by registered or certified mail).
   (B)   The operator shall notify the City Manager of any change to the name,
address and 24-hour phone number of the person(s) with supervisory authority
over drilling or operations activities within one business day.
   (C)   The operator shall provide a copy of any "incident reports" or written
complaints submitted to the Railroad Commission within 30 days after the
operator has notice of the existence of such reports or complaints.
   (D)   Beginning on December 31 after each well is completed, and continuing
on each December 31 thereafter until the operator notifies the City Manager
that the well has been abandoned and the site restored, the operator shall
submit a written report to the City Manager, identifying any changes to the
information included in the application for the applicable permit, which have
not been previously reported to the city.
   (E)   An annual site inspection shall be conducted on all permitted wells to
insure that the operator is conducting operations in compliance with the well
permit and the provisions of this chapter, and to verify the accuracy of the
information reported pursuant to this section. The operator shall pay an annual
inspection fee of $1,650, per well, due on October 1 and each October 1
thereafter until the well is abandoned according to the definitions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 01-2007-07, passed 1-23-07; Am. Ord. 06-2011-32, passed 6-28- 11; Am.
Ord. 08-2011-42, passed 8-9-11; Am. Ord. 09-2021-52, passed 9-28-21)
§ 118.20 APPEALS.
   (A)   The City Council shall have and exercise the power to hear and
determine appeals, where it is alleged there is error or abuse of discretion
regarding the issuance of a permit, or the revocation or suspension of any
permit issued hereunder, as provided by this chapter. Any person or entity
whose application is denied by the City Manager (other than for distance
requirements set out in this chapter), or whose permit is suspended or revoked,
or whose well or equipment is deemed by the City Manager to be abandoned, may,
within 30 days of the date of the written decision of the City Manager, file an
appeal to the City Council in accordance with the following procedure:
      (1)   An appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed in triplicate with
the City Secretary. The appellant shall specifically set forth the grounds for
appeal, and describe the error.
      (2)   Within 45 days of receipt of the records, the City Secretary shall
transmit all papers involved in the proceeding, place the matter on the City
Council agenda for hearing, and give notice by mail of the time, place and
purpose thereof to appellant and any other party who has requested in writing
to be so notified. No other notice need be given.
   (B)   Appeal fees shall be required for every appeal in the amount of $150.
   (C)   Following the public hearing, the City Council may uphold, modify or
reverse the decision of the City Manager.
(Ord. 01-2007-07, passed 1-23-07)
§ 118.98 VIOLATIONS.
   Subject to §
118.07, it shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or fail
to comply with any provision hereof, whether or not such section contains the
specific language that such violation or failure to comply is unlawful and is
an offense.
('68 Code, § 19½-18 (part)) (Ord. 10-1987-55, passed 10-20-87; Am. Ord. 01-
2007-07, passed 1-23-07)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be fined not more than $2,000 for all violations
involving zoning, fire safety, or public health and sanitation, including
dumping or refuse, and shall be fined $500 for all other violations of this
chapter. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
('68 Code, § 19½-18 (part)) (Ord. 10-1987-55, passed 10-20-87; Am. Ord. 7-1991-
21, passed 7-25-91; Am. Ord. 01-2007-07, passed 1-23-07; Am. Ord. 06-2011-32,
passed 6-28-11; Am. Ord. 08-2011-42, passed 8-9-11)
CHAPTER 119: WRECKERS
Section
General Provisions
   
119.01   Definitions
   
119.02   Debris at the accident scene to be removed
   
119.03   No wrecker at scene unless called by peace officer
   
119.04   Solicitation of wrecker business prohibited
   
119.05   City employees not to recommend wrecker
   
119.06   Off-street vehicles; coverage
   
119.07   Certain pushing or towing excepted from prohibitions
   
119.08   Location notice
Procedures for Police-Dispatched Wrecker Service
   
119.15   (Reserved)
   
119.16   Dispatch procedures
   
119.17   Police pulls/non-consent tows
Police Wrecker Rotation List
   
119.30   Police wrecker rotation list; procedures
   
119.31   Police pull certificate application; minimum equipment
   
119.32   Public hearing
   
119.33   Action of application
   
119.34   Issuance of certificate/renewals
   
119.35   Fees for non-consent tow generated service
   
119.36   Revocation
 
   
119.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned or junked vehicles on public or private property, see §
70.10
   Traffic Code, see
Title VII
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 119.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE.
      (1)   A motor vehicle is abandoned if the motor vehicle:
         (a)   Is inoperable, is more than five years old, and has been left
unattended on public property for more than 48 hours;
         (b)   Has remained illegally on public property for more than 48
hours;
         (c)   Has remained on private property without the consent of the
owner or person in charge of the property for more than 48 hours;
         (d)   Has been left unattended on the right-of-way of a designated
county, state, or federal highway for more than 48 hours;
         (e)   Has been left unattended for more than 24 hours on the right-of-
way of a turnpike project constructed and maintained by the Texas Turnpike
Authority division of the Texas Department of Transportation or a controlled
access highway; or
         (f)   Is considered an abandoned motor vehicle under Tex. Trans. Code
§ 644.153(r).
      (2)   In this definition, CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY has the meaning
assigned by Tex. Trans. Code § 541.302.
   ACCIDENT. Any occurrence which renders a vehicle wrecked or disabled as
defined herein.
   DISABLED VEHICLE. A vehicle which has been rendered unsafe to be driven as
the result of some occurrence other than a wreck including, but not limited to,
mechanical failures or break- downs, fire, vandalism, or a vehicle which is in
a safe driving condition but the owner is not present or able or permitted to
drive so as to reasonably necessitate that the vehicle be removed by a wrecker.
   JUNKED VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle that:
         (a)   Is self-propelled; and
         (b)   Is:
            1.   Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
            2.   Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
               A.   Seventy-two consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public
property; or
               B.   Thirty consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private
property.
      (2)   JUNKED VEHICLE includes a motor vehicle, aircraft, or watercraft.
This subchapter applies only to:
         (a)   A motor vehicle that displays an expired license plate or does
not display a license plate;
         (b)   An aircraft that does not have lawfully printed on the aircraft
an unexpired federal aircraft identification number registered under Federal
Aviation Administration aircraft registration regulations in 14 C.F.R. Part 47;
or
         (c)   A watercraft that:
            1.   Does not have lawfully on board an unexpired certificate of
number; and
            2.   Is not a watercraft described by Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code
§
31.055.
      (3)   A JUNKED VEHICLE will be towed to a location designated by the
city. The wrecker service will tow the vehicle to the designated location for
safe keeping until the vehicle can be demolished.
   NON-CONSENT TOW. Any tow of a motor vehicle in which the wrecker service is
summoned by a peace officer and not by the owner, operator, or person who has
possession, custody, or control of the vehicle.
   REASONABLE TIME. In this chapter, REASONABLE TIME is specified as 30-minute
response time to the scene after being given location and information specified
in §§
119.16(A) and (B). After 2200 hours an extra ten-minute response time will be
given. For heavy-duty tows, a 45 minute response time to the scene will be
allowed. Communications will make the call for the specified wrecker service;
if the wrecker service does not answer a message will be left, upon the second
call if no answer is made the next wrecker service on the rotation list will be
notified.
   STREET. Any street, alley, avenue, lane, square or highway within the
corporate limits of the City of Cleburne.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported upon a street, except devices moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   WRECKED VEHICLE. A vehicle that has been damaged as a result of overturning
or colliding with another vehicle or object so as to reasonably necessitate
that the vehicle be removed by a wrecker.
   WRECKER. A vehicle designed to be used primarily for removing wrecked or
disabled vehicles.
   WRECKER ROTATION LIST. The list of wrecker companies as provided for in this
chapter.
   WRECKER SERVICE. The business of towing, moving, or removing wrecked or
disabled vehicles for compensation, regardless of whether the purpose of the
removal is to repair, wreck, store, trade or purchase such wrecked or disabled
vehicles.
('68 Code, § 29½-1) (Ord. 8-1987-47, passed 8-11-87; Am. Ord. 07-2019-39,
passed 7-9-19; Am. Ord. 01-2024-05, passed 1-23-24)
§ 119.02 DEBRIS AT THE ACCIDENT SCENE TO BE REMOVED.
   Each and every wrecker service called to the scene of an accident shall
completely remove from the street all resulting wreckage or debris, including
all broken glass before leaving the site.
('68 Code, § 29½-2) (Ord. 8-1987-47, passed 8-11-87; Am. Ord. 07-2019-39,
passed 7-9-19) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.03 NO WRECKER AT SCENE UNLESS CALLED BY PEACE OFFICER.
   No wrecker shall arrive at the scene of an accident within the city unless
such wrecker has been called to the scene by the owner of the vehicle or his
authorized representative or by the police department. Each wrecker operator,
when called by the owner of the vehicle or his authorized representative, shall
notify Police Communications before proceeding to the scene of the accident.
('68 Code, § 29½-3) (Ord. 8-1987-47, passed 8-11-87; Am. Ord. 07-2019-39,
passed 7-9-19) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.04 SOLICITATION OF WRECKER BUSINESS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall solicit any wrecker business in any manner, directly
or indirectly, on the streets of the city at the scene of a wrecked or disabled
vehicle, regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose of
soliciting the business of towing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading or
purchasing the vehicle.
   (B)   The presence of any person engaged in the wrecker business on any
street at an accident scene or disablement who has not been notified by the
property owner or Police Communications, shall be prima facie evidence of a
solicitation in violation of this chapter.
('68 Code, § 29½-4) (Ord. 8-1987-47, passed 8-11-87; Am. Ord. 07-2019-39,
passed 7-9-19) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.05 CITY EMPLOYEES NOT TO RECOMMEND WRECKER.
   No employee of the city shall recommend to any person, directly or
indirectly, either by word or gesture, sign or otherwise, the name of any
particular wrecker service.
('68 Code, § 29½-5) (Ord. 8-1987-47, passed 8-11-87) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.06 OFF-STREET VEHICLES; COVERAGE.
   The prohibition and requirements set out in this chapter shall apply to all
accidents and disablements regardless of whether or not the final resting place
of a vehicle is upon a street immediately after the accident or disablement.
('68 Code, § 29½-6) (Ord. 8-1987-47, passed 8-11-87) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.07 CERTAIN PUSHING OR TOWING EXCEPTED FROM PROHIBITIONS.
   Vehicles may be pushed or towed by another vehicle (except by a wrecker for
compensation) only when they do not reasonably require removal by a wrecker and
only when such may be done in a safe manner. Such removal is exempted from all
the provisions of this chapter except §
119.04.
('68 Code, § 29½-7) (Ord. 8-1987-47, passed 8-11-87) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.08 LOCATION NOTICE.
   The wrecker service or their duly authorized agent is required to notify the
owner or driver of the location of a vehicle within 72 hours (excluding legal
holidays), unless exempted by regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police.
('68 Code, § 29½-8) (Ord. 8-1987-47, passed 8-11-87; Am. Ord. 07-2019-39,
passed 7-9-19) Penalty, see §
119.99
PROCEDURES FOR POLICE-DISPATCHED WRECKER SERVICE
§ 119.15 (RESERVED).
§ 119.16 DISPATCH PROCEDURES.
   When a police officer investigating a crash or disablement in the city
determines that any vehicle involved should be removed by a wrecker, the
officer shall first determine whether or not the owner or his authorized
representative has already made arrangements for its removal. If no
arrangements have been made, the investigating officer shall cause the
following steps to be taken, in sequence:
   (A)   The officer shall request that the driver, owner, or other occupant
indicate whether he has a particular wrecker service he wishes to be called to
the scene to remove the vehicle.
   (B)   The officer shall then immediately notify Police Communications of the
requested wrecker service. Police Communications shall immediately notify the
requested wrecker service which shall then immediately proceed to the scene of
the crash.
   (C)   If, for any reason, no wrecker service is selected, the officer shall
notify Police Communications to contact the wrecker service on the police
wrecker rotation list on duty for that week to respond to the scene for removal
of the vehicle.
   (D)   In the event that a wrecker does not arrive at the scene of an
accident or disablement within a reasonable time after being notified, the
peace officer at the scene may notify Police Communications that another
wrecker service on the police wrecker rotation list be notified to respond.
('68 Code, § 29½-10) (Ord. 8-1987-47, passed 8-11-87; Am. Ord. 07-2019-39,
passed 7-9-19) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.17 POLICE PULLS/NON-CONSENT TOWS.
   (A)   A peace officer is authorized to move a vehicle, require the driver or
other person in charge of a vehicle to move the same or have the vehicle
removed by a wrecker service on the police wrecker rotation list to the nearest
place of safety or to the premises of the wrecker service, under the
circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct,
tunnel or public street in the city where such vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to traffic;
      (2)   When any vehicle is illegally parked or is otherwise legally parked
so as to block the entrance to any private driveway and it is impracticable to
move the vehicle from in front of the driveway to another point on the street;
      (3)   When any vehicle is found upon a street and a report has previously
been made that the vehicle has been stolen;
      (4)   When any such officer has reasonable grounds to believe that any
vehicle has been abandoned;
      (5)   When a vehicle upon a street is so wrecked or disabled that its
normal operation is impossible or impractical and the person or persons in
charge of the vehicle are incapacitated by reason of physical injury or other
reason to such extent as to be unable to provide for its removal or custody, or
are not in the immediate vicinity of the wrecked or disabled vehicle;
      (6)   When a peace officer arrests any person driving or in control of a
vehicle for an alleged offense and such peace officer is by this code or other
law required to take the person arrested immediately before a magistrate;
      (7)   Whenever any police officer of the city finds a vehicle standing
upon a street, public or private property in violation of any state law or
local code or ordinance provision.
   (B)   Any peace officer of the city is authorized to remove any vehicle
parked or standing in or on any portion of a street when, in the opinion of the
officer, the vehicle constitutes a hazard or interferes with a normal function
of a governmental agency, or by reason of any catastrophic emergency or unusual
circumstance the safety of the vehicle, other vehicles, other property or an
individual is imperiled.
   (C)   When a peace officer stops a vehicle for an alleged violation of a
city ordinance or state traffic law or other law applicable to the operation of
a vehicle on the roadway and the vehicle's owner or operator fails to show
evidence of financial responsibility as required under Tex. Trans. Code, Ch.
601, as amended, and has been previously convicted of failing to show evidence
of financial responsibility as required, the officer is authorized to impound
the vehicle.
   (D)   When a peace officer pull is made in accordance with divisions (A),
(B), or (C), the peace officer shall notify Police Communications of the
circumstances and request that the wrecker service on the police wrecker
rotation list for that week be called and directed to the scene to remove the
vehicle.
   (E)   In the event that a wrecker does not arrive at the scene of a peace
officer pull location within a reasonable time after being notified or is
unable to promptly clear the scene, the peace officer at the scene may notify
Police Communications that the next operator on the wrecker rotation list be
called to arrive at the scene.
('68 Code, § 29½-11) (Ord. 8-1987-47, passed 8-11-87; Am. Ord. 07-2019-39,
passed 7-9-19) Penalty, see §
119.99
POLICE WRECKER ROTATION LIST
§ 119.30 POLICE WRECKER ROTATION LIST; PROCEDURES.
   (A)   In order to expedite wrecker service, the Chief of Police is empowered
and directed to establish a police wrecker rotation list, to assign wrecker
services to such list for designated periods of time and if necessary, to
partition the city into zones for wrecker service. Such assignments and if
necessary partitioning, shall be made in a manner fair and impartial to all
wrecker services and in a manner calculated to best serve the public. Notice of
assignment of wrecker companies and the time they will serve shall be provided
each service on such list.
   (B)   The pulls shall be assigned by Police Communications by calling the
wrecker company on the police wrecker rotation list on duty for that week.
   (C)   To implement the police wrecker rotation list procedure, the Police
Department shall maintain a master list containing the names of qualified
wrecker companies and operators. No wrecker company or operator shall be placed
upon the list unless the company has complied with the provisions of this
chapter.
('68 Code, § 29½-12) (Ord. 8-1987-47, passed 8-11-87; Am. Ord. 07-2019-39,
passed 7-9-19)
§ 119.31 POLICE PULL CERTIFICATE APPLICATION; MINIMUM EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   In order to qualify for placement on the police wrecker rotation list,
a wrecker service must submit a sworn application to the Chief of Police
showing that he has satisfied the following:
      (1)   Have at least one heavy (or have access to one heavy duty truck),
one medium, and two light duty trucks within the county and available at all
times while on rotation. All trucks must be in proper working order and carry
the following safety equipment:
         (a)   Dual rear wheels;
         (b)   Broom and shovel;
         (c)   Minimum lift capacity of 8,000 pounds;
         (d)   Trash container (five gallon);
         (e)   Manufacturers data plate;
         (f)   Gloves;
         (g)   Hydraulic winch;
         (h)   Wheel chocks;
         (i)   Minimum wheel lift device 2,500 pounds;
         (j)   Overhead warning lights;
         (k)   Tow lights;
         (l)   No fluid leaks on winch or hydraulic lines;
         (m)   Safety chain/strap;
         (n)   Reflectors or safety cones;
         (o)   Fire extinguisher;
         (p)   Heavy duty chains/straps; and
         (q)   A tie rope or strap.
      (2)   Provide a means for transporting vehicles damaged beyond towing;
      (3)   Allow or will allow the Chief of Police to inspect all wrecker
vehicles and equipment, said inspection may be waived with proof of an
inspection by personnel from the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation
(TDLR) in the past 12 months;
      (4)   They have and shall maintain a valid incident management towing
permit pursuant to Tex. Admin. Code, Title 16, Ch. 86, as amended, to perform a
non-consent tow initiated by a peace officer;
      (5)   They possess a current vehicle storage facility license from the
state in accordance with Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation, Tex.
Admin. Code, Title 16, Ch. 85;
      (6)   Maintain a storage lot with sufficient lighting which is fenced and
locked (fence must be at least six feet in height);
      (7)   All wrecker drivers will have a mobile phone capable of
communication to the Police Communication Center;
      (8)   Maintain sufficient personnel to operate the minimum equipment,
dispatch the equipment, secure property stored in the storage lot, and release
impounded vehicles;
      (9)   Are willing to operate 365 days each year on a 24-hour basis for
the purpose of making wrecker pulls;
      (10)   Will furnish the Police Department a copy of the fee schedule for
the upcoming year beginning October 1 of each year and notify the police
department of any changes;
      (11)   Maintains an insurance policy covering public liability and
property damage. The policy of public liability and property damage insurance
shall be issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state
and in the standard form approved by the Board of Insurance Commissioners of
the state; such policy shall name the city as an additionally insured party.
The coverage provision will insure the public from loss or damage that may
arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of a wrecker of the
applicant and shall provide that the amount of recovery on each wrecker shall
be in limits of not less than the following sums:
         (a)   $500,000 liability; and
         (b)   $50,000 on-hook cargo.
      (12)   Maintains garage keeper’s legal liability based on a maximum
capacity of storage lot:
         (a)   A minimum of $30,000 per person, up to $60,000 per accident, and
$25,000 for property damage per accident; or
         (b)   $85,000 in garage liability insurance.
   (B)   The applicant shall pay to the city:
      (1)   An initial application fee of $100 (or renewal fee of $25); and
      (2)   A fee of $20 for each wrecker in operation.
   (C)   The policy required herein shall contain an endorsement providing for
a 30-day notice to the Chief of Police in the event of any material change or
cancellation of the policy.
('68 Code, § 29½-13) (Ord. 8-1987-47, passed 8-11-87; Am. Ord. 07-2019-39,
passed 7-9-19; Am. Ord. 01-2024-05, passed 1-23-24)
§ 119.32 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   Upon receipt of such written application for new applicants, the
Council shall schedule a public hearing on the application. Notice of such
public hearing shall be given to the applicant and all wrecker services on the
police wrecker rotation list affected thereby by depositing such written notice
in the United States mail in an envelope, properly addressed to each such
person at his respective address on file with the Chief of Police and bearing
sufficient postage, at least ten days prior to such public hearing.
   (B)   The purpose of such public hearing shall be to determine, among other
things, the following:
      (1)   Whether or not the public convenience and necessity require the
operation of the service applied for and the placement of such applicant on the
police wrecker rotation list;
      (2)   Whether or not the applicant is a fit and proper person to conduct
such business;
      (3)   Whether the applicant will be able to afford public service of such
permanence and quality as to best serve the public interest;
      (4)   The experience that the applicant has had in rendering such
services;
      (5)   The past experience of applicant in satisfying judgements, if any;
      (6)   The financial ability of the applicant to satisfy any judgement
that might be rendered;
      (7)   The character and condition of the vehicles the applicant proposes
to use;
      (8)   The qualifications of the drivers which the wrecker service intends
to employ to drive the vehicles authorized by requested certificate;
      (9)   The interrelationship of the requested certificate and travel time
within the city from the applicant's main office, past experience with
applicant's service, charges for service, and operating condition,
capabilities, expenses and income.
('68 Code, § 29½-14) (Ord. 8-1987-47, passed 8-11-87; Am. Ord. 07-2019-39,
passed 7-9-19)
§ 119.33 ACTION OF APPLICATION.
   In the event the City Council finds that the public convenience and
necessity require the issuance of such a certificate and that the applicant
meets the required qualifications to give proper and adequate service to the
best interest of the inhabitants of the city, the Council shall, by resolution,
grant a certificate of public convenience and necessity to such applicant which
will allow said applicant to be placed on the police wrecker rotation list to
be effective for a period of one year and renewable annually by the Chief of
Police. In the event that the City Council does not so find the applicant will
be rejected and the applicant is precluded from filing a new application for a
period of one year.
('68 Code, § 29½-15) (Ord. 8-1987-47, passed 8-11-87; Am. Ord. 07-2019-39,
passed 7-9-19)
§ 119.34 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE/RENEWALS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall issue the certificate upon approval of the
Council and upon the obtaining of the signature of the applicant to the
original certificate. The original copy shall be filed with the Chief of Police
and a copy shall be furnished the wrecker service or operator.
   (B)   A current non-consent wrecker service certificate holder may apply to
the Chief of Police for a certificate renewal annually. The application for
renewal of certificate shall be in writing and shall state:
      (1)   All changes to information contained in the original certificate
application; and
      (2)   That all other information contained in the original application is
true and correct. This renewal application shall be sworn to.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to deny any wrecker
service a renewal certificate if the wrecker service fails to meet the
requirements provided in accordance with this chapter.
('68 Code, § 29½-16) (Ord. 8-1987-47, passed 8-11-87; Am. Ord. 07-2019-39,
passed 7-9-19)
§ 119.35 FEES FOR NON-CONSENT TOW GENERATED SERVICE.
   (A)   The tow company may not charge more than the basic towing service fees
set forth in Exhibit “A” which is not set out herein, but is on file and
available for inspection in the office of the City Secretary. Exhibit “A” will
be used for all fee purposes, unless explicitly authorized. Hourly rates for
time worked of less than an hour may be rounded up to the next quarter hour.
The tow company agrees that it will not be compensated for any additional
expenses or towing fees that result from the tow company’s failure to provide
standard towing equipment on a responding truck. The tow company may charge a
towing fee for an additional truck if the scene requires an additional tow
truck and the officer in charge of the scene consents to the tow company’s
provision of any additional truck. If a tow truck responds to a call and is
unable to perform the tow due to its own acts or omissions, it shall not be
entitled to any compensation, and its failure may be considered a general
violation.
   (B)   If the tow company reports a scene at the request of the officer and
the owner or driver requests that the vehicle be towed to the location of their
choice, the tow becomes a “consent tow” and the towing fees set forth in
Exhibit “A” shall not apply (See Ch. 2308 of the Tex. Occupations Code).
('68 Code, § 29½-17) (Ord. 8-1987-47, passed 8-11-87; Am. Ord. 07-2019-39,
passed 7-9-19; Am. Ord. 01-2024-05, passed 1-23-24)
§ 119.36 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The City Council is authorized and empowered to revoke permission or
remove a wrecker service from the police wrecker rotation list established
hereunder, after giving such certificate holder ten-days' notice of a hearing
and after conducting such a hearing, for the purpose of determining whether
such permission should be revoked.
   (B)   The power of revocation shall be exercised upon the following grounds:
      (1)   If the certificate was procured by fraudulent conduct, a false
statement of material fact, or a fact concerning applicant was not disclosed at
the time of making his application.
      (2)   For violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   If the certificate holder has violated this chapter by overcharging
according to his fee schedule or has violated any rules and regulations
established by the Chief of Police.
   (C)   The revocation of an applicant's certificate of public convenience and
necessity on the police wrecker rotation list shall terminate all authority and
permission herein granted. Any person whose permission has been revoked shall
not be eligible to again apply for placement on the police wrecker rotation
list for a period of one year from the date of the revocation.
('68 Code, § 29½-18) (Ord. 8-1987-47, passed 8-11-87; Am. Ord. 07-2019-39,
passed 7-9-19)
§ 119.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be liable to a penalty as set forth in §
10.99 of this code.
(Ord. 07-2019-39, passed 7-9-19)
CHAPTER 120: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
120.01   Definitions
   
120.02   Permit required
   
120.03   Sale of beer and wine prohibited in residential areas
   
120.04   Sale of alcoholic beverages near churches, public hospitals, public or
private schools
   
120.05   Hours of sale of alcoholic beverages
 
   
120.99   Penalty
§ 120.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. An alcoholic beverage as defined in the Tex. Alcoholic
Beverage Code, and shall specifically include beer, wine and mixed beverages,
as those terms are defined in the Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code.
   SCHOOL, PRIVATE. A school including a parochial school that is not operated
by an independent school district that offers a course of instruction for
students in one or more grades from kindergarten through grade 12 and has more
than 100 students enrolled and attending courses at a single location.
   SCHOOL, PUBLIC. Any school operated by an independent school district that
offers a course of instruction for students in one or more grades from
kindergarten through grade 12.
(Ord. 05-2009-31, passed 5-26-09)
§ 120.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   There is hereby levied and assessed and shall be collected by the City
of Cleburne a permit fee from every person pursuing or engaging in any business
in the City of Cleburne for which a permit or license is required by the Tex.
Alcoholic Beverage Code. Such fee shall be in an amount equal to one-half of
the state fee charged for such permit or license as such fee now exists or
shall from time to time be established or modified pursuant to such Code. The
city permit fees shall not, however, be applicable to mixed beverage permits
during the first, second and third years of their existence. The City of
Cleburne adopts those exemptions from the permit and license fee requirement as
are provided in the Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code.
   (B)   Upon payment to the City Secretary of the applicable city permit fee
prescribed in this section and exhibition to the City Secretary of a permit or
license duly issued by the state to the applicant or person paying such fee,
the City Secretary shall, in the name of the city, issue and deliver to such
applicant or person a permit to engage in the business in the city of the
character described in and authorized by the permit or license from the state
held by such applicant or person. The permit so issued in the name of the city
shall authorize the conduct of such business upon the premises described in the
permit or license from the state, and shall remain in force only so long as
such permit or license from the state remains in force. The city permit shall
be publicly displayed on the premises together with the state permit or
license.
   (C)   All permits issued under the terms of this chapter shall be issued in
conjunction with the license issued and/or renewed by the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Commission or every two years from the date issued. No part of the
city fee shall be refunded if a permit is terminated before the expiration date
of the permit.
(Ord. 05-2009-31, passed 5-26-09; Am. Ord. 07-2015-51, passed 7-14- 15)
Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.03 SALE OF BEER AND WINE PROHIBITED IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   The sale of beer and wine on residentially zoned property in the City of
Cleburne is hereby prohibited, in accordance with Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code
§ 109.32. Under this section, RESIDENTIAL AREAS shall mean any property located
in the following districts as described in the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance
of the city: A, 1H, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-4, SF-A, SF-4/MH, D, T, MF,
residential PD Districts and MH, and other areas which are not in any of these
districts but are being legally used for residential purposes.
(Ord. 05-2009-31, passed 5-26-09) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.04 SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES NEAR CHURCHES, PUBLIC HOSPITALS, PUBLIC OR
PRIVATE SCHOOLS.
   (A)   Churches and public hospitals.
      (1)   The sale of alcoholic beverages within 300 feet of a church or
public hospital is hereby prohibited.
      (2)   The measurement of the distance between the place of business where
alcoholic beverages are sold and a church or public hospital shall be along the
property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a
direct line across intersections.
   (B)   Public and private schools.
      (1)   The sale of alcoholic beverages within 300 feet of a public or
private school is hereby prohibited.
      (2)   The measurement of the distance between the place of business where
alcoholic beverages are sold and a public or private school shall be in a
direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the
property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across
intersections.
   (C)   Responsibility for measurements. The Development Services Division of
the city shall be responsible for the measurement of distances under this
section.
   (D)   Exceptions. The above regulations prohibiting the sale of alcoholic
beverages within specified distances from churches, public hospitals and public
and private schools are subject to any and all conditions and exceptions
established in the Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code.
   (E)   Notices.  Every applicant for an original alcoholic beverage license
or permit for a location with a door by which the public may enter the place of
business of the applicant that is within 1,000 feet of the nearest property
line of a public or private school, measured along street lines and directly
across intersections, must give written notice of the application to officials
of the public or private school before filing the application with the city and
the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission. A copy of the notice must be submitted
to the city and the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission with the application.
This division does not apply to a permit or license covering a location where
minors are prohibited from entering the premises under Tex. Alcoholic Beverage
Code § 109.53.
   (F)   (1)   The City Council may allow a variance to this section if it
determines that the enforcement of the regulation in a particular instance is
not in the best interests of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use
of land or other resources, creates an undue hardship on the applicant for a
license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, or is not effective or
necessary, or that a previous permit was issued for the premises in error and
enforcement of the regulation would be inequitable, or for any other reason the
City Council determines, after consideration of the health, safety and welfare
of the public and the equities of the situation, that the variance is in the
best interest of the community. No variance may be granted under this division
(F) except after a public hearing for which notice has been given not less than
ten days prior to the hearing date both in the official city newspaper and by
regular United States mail to property owners within 300 feet of the place of
business which requests a variance. The notice shall be sent to all such owners
who have rendered their property for city taxes as the ownership appears on the
last approved city tax roll. The notice area for a variance request relating to
a public hospital or church shall be measured in a direct line from the front
door of the place of business. The notice area for a variance request relating
to a public or private school shall be measured in a direct line from the
property line of the place of business.
      (2)   When an application has been denied by the City Council or when the
applicant has withdrawn a request after the giving of public notice, no new
application for a variance shall be accepted by the city or scheduled for a
hearing within a period of 12 months from the date of a denial or withdrawal
unless the variance request is denied without prejudice.
      (3)   The fee for application shall be $330.
      (4)   The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have no jurisdiction to grant
a variance from any of the regulations established in this chapter.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, a variance is
hereby granted to allow the sale of alcoholic beverages within 300 feet of a
church at any premise covered by a permit or license for the sale of alcoholic
beverages by the holder of a food and beverage certificate if the premises is
located in the original downtown overlay district as defined in § 155.2,
2.04.B. of the zoning code.
(Ord. 05-2009-31, passed 5-26-09; Am. Ord. 08-2009-50, passed 8-11-09; Am. Ord.
06-2018-48, passed 6-26-18) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.05 HOURS OF SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   Mixed beverage permittee. The hours of sale for mixed beverages shall
be, as established by Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.53, as follows:
      (1)   Monday through Saturday: A mixed beverage permittee may sell and
offer for sale mixed beverages between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m.
      (2)   Sunday: A mixed beverage permittee may sell and offer for sale
mixed beverages between 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m, except that an alcoholic
beverage served to a customer between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. (noon) on
Sunday must be provided during the service of food to the customer.
   (B)   Off-premise beer and wine permittee. The hours of sale and delivery
for alcoholic beverages sold under a wine and beer retailer's off-premise
permit shall be as established by Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.04, which
hours are the same as those prescribed for the sale of beer under Tex.
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.05. The hours of sale and delivery for alcoholic
beverages sold under a wine and beer retailer's off-premise permit shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Monday through Saturday: A wine and beer retailer's off-premise
permittee may sell, offer for sale, or deliver wine and beer between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight) on any day except Sunday.
      (2)   Sunday: A wine and beer retailer's off-premise permittee may sell,
offer for sale, or deliver wine and beer between the hours of 12:00 a.m.
(midnight) and 1:00 a.m. and between 12:00 p.m. (noon) and 12:00 a.m.
(midnight).
(Ord. 05-2009-31, passed 5-26-09; Am. Ord. 05-2015-36, passed 5-26-15) Penalty,
see §
120.99
§ 120.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of §
120.04(F) shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $500 for all
violations.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the
other provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than $500 for each
offense.
   (C)   Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 05-2009-31, passed 5-26-09; Am. Ord. 08-2009-50, passed 8-11-09)
CHAPTER 121: SMOKING
Section
   
121.01   Definitions
   
121.02   Smoking may be prohibited
   
121.03   Smoking prohibited in city-owned buildings and parks and certain
outdoor areas
   
121.04   Enforcement
 
   
121.99   Penalty
§ 121.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply to this chapter.
   OPERATOR. The owner or person in charge of a public building, place, or
workplace, including an employer.
   PERSON. Any individual.
   PLAYGROUND EQUIPMENT. Any piece of equipment used for a child's play area,
including but not limited to, swings, slides, monkey bars, and sand areas where
children regularly play.
   PRIVATE CLUB. An association of persons as members, whether incorporated or
unincorporated under the laws of the state, for the promotion of some common
object, and organized by a board of representatives, including, but not limited
to, a fraternal organization, private social club or dinner club. PRIVATE CLUB
described as a facility in this chapter shall mean any enclosed area to which
the public is not invited or in which the public is not permitted which is
owned, leased or rented by the private club for its members and their guests. A
privately-owned business, open to the public, is not a private club.
   PUBLIC BUILDING. Any building other than a building used as a private
residence. If portions of a building are used as a private residence and
another portion of the building is used for business purposes or commercial
activities, then PUBLIC BUILDING as used herein shall apply to the portions of
the building used for business purposes or commercial purposes, but not the
portion used solely as a residence. The term PUBLIC BUILDING includes, but is
not limited to, restaurants, offices and other workplaces, warehouses, health
care facilities, and elevators, and enclosed common areas of multifamily
developments. For purposes of this definition, it does not include a private
area not accessible to the public.
   SMOKING or SMOKE. Inhaling, exhaling, or burning a lighted cigar, cigarette,
pipe or other lighted tobacco, weed, or other plant product in any manner or
form, and/or any electronic vaping device, which shall mean any electronically
powered or battery powered device designed to simulate the smoking of tobacco,
cigarettes, pipes or cigars. An electronic vaping device includes personal
vaporizers, electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes), electronic pipes (e-pipes),
electronic cigars (e-cigars) and any other type of electronic nicotine delivery
system or any part thereof.
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Pipe, cigar, cigarette and any other burning tobacco or
smokeless tobacco goods, including but not limited to chew tobacco, dip
tobacco, or snuff.
(Ord. 03-2015-20, passed 3-24-15)
§ 121.02 SMOKING MAY BE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   An operator of any public building may adopt a policy for the public
building which:
      (1)   Allows smoking throughout the public building by designating the
public building as a smoking facility;
      (2)   Prohibits smoking throughout the public building by designating the
public building as a non-smoking facility; or
      (3)   Designates separate rooms or areas throughout the public building
in which smoking is permitted in those designated rooms or areas only.
   (B)   If an operator prohibits smoking throughout a public building by the
placement of signs, it shall be unlawful for any person to perform the
following acts in the public building or within 25 feet of any public entrance
or exit to the public building:
      (1)   Smoke;
      (2)   Carry a lighted cigarette, cigar, or tobacco-containing pipe;
      (3)   Light a cigarette, cigar or tobacco-containing pipe; or
      (4)   Use an electronic smoking device.
   (C)   If an operator designates any portion of a public building as non-
smoking by the placement of signs, it shall be unlawful for any person to
perform the following acts in the designated non-smoking portions of that
public building or within 25 feet of any public entrance or exit to the public
building:
      (1)   Smoke;
      (2)   Carry a lighted cigarette, cigar, or tobacco-containing pipe;
      (3)   Light a cigarette, cigar or tobacco-containing pipe; or
      (4)   Use an electronic smoking device.
   (D)    If an operator prohibits smoking throughout a public building by the
placement of signs, it shall be unlawful for any person to place or allow to be
placed any of the following items in that public building or within 25 feet
from an entrance or exit to the public building:
      (1)   Ashtrays placed for use in the building;
      (2)   Smoking paraphernalia placed for use in the building; or
      (3)   Litter or refuse resulting from smoking.
   (E)   If an operator designates any portion of a public building as non-
smoking by the placement of signs, it shall be unlawful for any person to place
or allow to be placed any of the following items in the designated non-smoking
areas of the public building or within 25 feet from an entrance or exit to the
public building:
      (1)   Ashtrays placed for use in the building;
      (2)   Smoking paraphernalia placed for use in the building; or
      (3)   Litter or refuse resulting from smoking.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for an operator to allow anyone under the age of
18, unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or adult over the age of 21, to
enter a public building for which smoking has been permitted throughout the
entire public building.
   (G)   If an operator allows smoking only in designated areas, the designated
smoking areas must have a segregated ventilation system and physical barriers
must be erected to fully segregate the smoking areas from the non-smoking areas
in order to minimize the toxic effect on adjacent non-smoking areas. All public
restrooms shall be located in non-smoking areas and may not be located in an
area where an individual must travel through a smoking area in order to arrive
at the public restroom.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any operator of any public building to allow
the operation of the establishment unless one or more signs with the following
language have been posted at a location clearly visible to a person entering
the establishment:
      (1)   A "No Smoking Permitted in this Establishment" sign that includes
the international "No Smoking" symbol (depiction of a burning cigarette
enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it); or
      (2)   A "Smoking Permitted in Designated Areas Only" sign that indicates
in detail the areas in which smoking is permitted; or
      (3)   A "Smoking is Permitted in this Establishment" sign.
   (I)   An operator shall provide facilities for the extinguishment of smoking
materials only in areas where smoking is permitted. The facilities shall be
located so as to be readily accessible for extinguishment of smoking materials.
(Ord. 03-2015-20, passed 3-24-15)
§ 121.03 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN CITY-OWNED BUILDINGS AND PARKS AND CERTAIN
OUTDOOR AREAS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or use any tobacco
product in the following places:
      (1)   Any city-owned, operated, or leased building;
      (2)   Any city-owned park or trail maintained by the city in the area
where playground equipment is located;
      (3)   Within 25 feet of the entrance to any building owned, operated, or
leased by the city or within 25 feet of any city-owned park or trail in the
area where playground equipment is located;
      (4)   In any vehicle owned or leased by the city; and
      (5)   In any public outdoor area where people gather, including
bleachers, sports venues, and Market Square, where notice is posted in a manner
consistent with division (B).
   (B)   Notice shall be given by posting written "NO SMOKING. NO TOBACCO
PRODUCTS." signs at or near the main entrance of each building or outdoor area.
Each letter in the sign shall be at least 1.5 inches in height. Notice shall be
given on all rules and regulations signs located in all parks.
(Ord. 03-2015-20, passed 3-24-15)
§ 121.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The City Manager or his or her designee is authorized to issue
citations and take all action necessary to enforce this chapter.
   (B)   Violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of up to
$500.00. Each separate violation shall be punishable hereunder and each day
each such violation shall be allowed to exist or continue shall constitute a
separate violation.
(Ord. 03-2015-20, passed 3-24-15)
§ 121.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty set forth in § 10.99 of
the City of Cleburne Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 03-2015-20, passed 3-24-15)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      Chapter
         
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
Offenses Generally
   
130.01   Visiting or talking to prisoners without permission
   
130.02   Damaging public or private property
   
130.03   Posting advertisements on property of another
   
130.04   Political advertising and other advertising upon utility poles and
public right-of-way prohibited
   
130.05   Loudspeakers — use on or near streets
   
130.06   Franchise holders charging excessive rates
   
130.07   Wells, pits and the like to be protected
   
130.08   Disorderly conduct
   
130.09   Discharging firearms
   
130.10   Shooting air gun or slingshot
   
130.11   Unauthorized camping prohibited
   
130.12   Loitering
   
130.13   [Reserved]
   
130.14   Males entering or using ladies' rest room
   
130.15   Pornographic material; wholesalers and retailers required to identify
materials
   
130.16   Inhalants and prohibited inhalants; sale and use
   
130.17   Police identification numbers
   
130.18   [Reserved]
   
130.19   [Reserved]
   
130.20   Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages on city property and
in certain areas adjacent to parks
   
130.21   Noise as nuisance
   
130.22   Sexual offender: residency restrictions
   
130.23   Property owners prohibited from renting real property to sexual
offenders
   
130.24   Prepayment for fuel at retail fuel business
   
130.25   Use of skateboards, roller skates and roller blades prohibited on
designated property
   
130.26   Restricted smoking materials
   
130.27   Returned check charge
Parking on Private Property
   
130.60   Definitions
   
130.61   General parking restrictions
   
130.62   Residential parking restrictions
   
130.63   Recreational vehicle parking
   
130.64   Impoundment of illegally parked vehicles or equipment
 
   
130.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Damaging parking meters, see §
72.47
   Damaging property on Lake Pat Cleburne, see §
98.063
   Damaging traffic-control devices, see §
70.26
   Damaging trees during house moving, see §
150.094
   Multi-Channel Services Providers
      Preferential or discriminatory treatment prohibited, see §
112.071
      Tampering with equipment, see §
112.028
      Unauthorized reception, see §
112.028
   Vandalism in cemeteries, see §
92.16
OFFENSES GENERALLY
§ 130.01 VISITING OR TALKING TO PRISONERS WITHOUT PERMISSION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to visit and talk with prisoners
incarcerated in the city jail, without first having obtained permission from
the officer in charge.
('68 Code, § 19-1)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.02 DAMAGING PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, deface, mark, break, injure,
damage or destroy any tree, shrub, building, sign, fence, bridge, pavement,
gutter, or any other property not his own, whether such property is public or
private.
('68 Code, § 19-2)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.03 POSTING ADVERTISEMENTS ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER.
   Any person who shall, without first having obtained permission from the
owner, stick, paint, or stamp upon any house, fence, wall or pavement, or other
object not his own, any written, printed or other notice, bill, sign, circular,
poster or advertisement shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('68 Code, § 19-3)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.04 POLITICAL ADVERTISING AND OTHER ADVERTISING UPON UTILITY POLES AND
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to post, attach, affix or adhere;
or cause to be posted, attached, affixed or adhered any bandit sign within the
city. The city may remove bandit signs without notice. Bandit signs with an
estimated value of $50 or less may be discarded immediately. Bandit signs with
an estimated value greater than $50 may be held by the city for 30 days after
removal and may be recovered by the owner at the discretion of the city.
   (B)   Any person who posts, attaches, affixes or adheres; or causes to be
posted, attached, affixed or adhered any bandit sign within the city shall be
deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500
for each sign placed.
('68 Code, § 19-3.1) (Ord. 3-1977-7, passed 3-1-77; Ord. 2-1986-04, passed 2-
11-86; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.05 LOUDSPEAKERS — USE ON OR NEAR STREETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate, or cause to be
used or operated, any mechanical or electrical device, machine, apparatus or
instrument to intensify or to amplify or to reproduce the human voice, or any
other sound, on any public street within the city corporate limits.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate, or cause to be
used or operated, any mechanical or electrical device, machine, apparatus or
instrument to intensify, amplify or reproduce the human voice, or any other
sound in any building or on any premises in the city, whereby the sound
therefrom is cast directly upon the public streets or places or where such
device is maintained and operated for advertising purposes or for the purpose
of attracting the attention of the passing public, or which is so placed or
operated that the sound coming therefrom can be heard to the annoyance or
inconvenience of travelers upon any street or public place, or of persons in
neighboring premises.
   (C)   Any person desiring to use a device to intensify or amplify the voice
or sound in broadcasting a speech, speaking or program matters of public
interest, and not of a strictly advertising nature, or a series of speeches or
programs on matters of public interest not of a strictly advertising nature,
may apply to the Chief of Police for a special permit to do so. Upon such
application being presented, the chief of police shall investigate same and if
he finds that such speech, speaking or program is a matter, of public interest,
and will not result in annoyance or inconvenience to travelers upon any street
or public place or persons in neighboring premises, he may, in his discretion,
grant such permit. A fee of $1 shall be paid for making such investigation at
the time the application is filed, whether the permit. is granted or not, which
fee shall be placed in the general fund of the city. If such application is for
the broadcasting of a series of speeches, speakings or programs, the Chief of
Police shall present same to the City Council, together with his findings and
recommendations, for the approval of the council and, if the council approves
same, the permit shall be issued for the series of speeches or programs, but if
the Council does not approve same, the permit shall be refused.
   (D)   The purpose of this section is to prevent any noise on any public
street which is reasonably calculated to disturb the peace and good order of
the neighborhood or of the persona owning, using or occupying property adjacent
to such public streets.
('68 Code, § 19-4)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.06 FRANCHISE HOLDERS CHARGING EXCESSIVE RATES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person holding a franchise granted by the city
to charge, receive, collect or demand from any person any charge or
compensation greater than that fixed in such franchise.
('68 Code, § 19-6)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.07 WELLS, PITS AND THE LIKE TO BE PROTECTED.
   Any person being the owner or agent or having control of any vacant or
unenclosed lot within the city, who shall knowingly allow any well, pit, hole
or over place to remain without guarding, fencing or securely covering the
same, so as to prevent persons and animals from falling therein, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('68 Code, § 19-8)
Penalty, see § 130.99
Cross-reference:
   Protection of holes, ditches and the like during construction, §
150.003
§ 130.08 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he or she intentionally or knowingly:
      (1)   Uses abusive, indecent, profane, or vulgar language in a public
place, and the language by its very utterance tends to incite an immediate
breach of the peace;
      (2)   Makes an offensive gesture or display in a public place, and the
gesture or display tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace;
      (3)   Creates, by chemical means, a noxious and unreasonable odor in a
public place;
      (4)   Abuses or threatens a person in a public place in an obviously
offensive manner;
      (5)   Makes unreasonable noise in a public place other than a sport
shooting range, as defined by Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 250.001, or in or near a
private residence that he or she has no right to occupy;
      (6)   Fights with another in a public place;
      (7)   Enters on the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful
purpose looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other
opening in the dwelling;
      (8)   While on the premises of a hotel or comparable establishment, for a
lewd or unlawful purpose looks into a guest room not his or her own through a
window or other opening in the room;
      (9)   Discharges a firearm in a public place other than a public road or
a sport shooting range, Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 250.001;
      (10)    Displays a firearm or other deadly weapon in a public place in a
manner calculated to alarm;
      (11)    Discharges a firearm on or across a public road; or
      (12)    Exposes his or her anus or genitals in a public place and is
reckless about whether another may be present who will be offended or alarmed
by his or her act.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (A)(4) that the actor
had significant provocation for his or her abusive or threatening conduct.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, an act is deemed to occur in a public
place or near a private residence if it produces its offensive or proscribed
consequences in the public place or near a private residence.
   (D)   An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor unless
committed under division (A)(9) or (A)(10), in which event it is a Class B
misdemeanor.
(Tex. Penal Code § 42.01) ('68 Code, § 19-9)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.09 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   If any person shall discharge any gun, pistol or firearm of any description
within the city limits, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. This sections
shall not apply to police officers in the discharge of their duties nor to the
discharge of firearms at locations and times approved in advance by the chief
of police.
('68 Code, § 19-11)
Penalty, see § 130.99
Cross-reference:
   Cemeteries, see §
92.10
   Discharging firearms on Lake Pat Cleburne, see §
98.064
§ 130.10 SHOOTING AIR GUN OR SLINGSHOT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any air gun or slingshot within
the city.
('68 Code, § 19-12)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.11 UNAUTHORIZED CAMPING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      AUTHORIZATION. Express written permission given by the property owner or
the owner’s agent.
      CAMP. To reside, dwell, sleep, or otherwise remain temporarily in a
place, using transitory shelter.
      EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. Any private school, including a parochial school
that offers a course of instruction for students in one or more grades from
kindergarten through grade 12, or a private college or university.
      GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY. Any federal, state, or local government, including,
but not limited to, a municipality, county, unit of state government, public
school district, junior college district, or special purpose district.
      NON-RESIDENTIAL. Any property or area within the territorial limits of
the city that is not included in a residential district as defined in the
zoning ordinance or that is used for a commercial or industrial use.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY. Property or an area that is owned by an entity or
individual that is not a governmental entity or educational institution.
      RESIDENTIAL. Any property or area within the territorial limits of the
city that is located in a residential district as defined in the zoning
ordinance including vacant residentially zoned lots.
      TRANSITORY SHELTER. Without limitation, any vehicle or motor vehicle,
including recreational vehicles and truck-tractors, any tent, tarpaulin, lean-
to, sleeping bag, bedroll, blankets, or any form of cover or protection from
the elements other than clothing. A recreational vehicle, semi-truck, or
tractor trailer lawfully parked at a truck stop with fuel and accessory
services shall not be considered TRANSITORY SHELTER for the purpose of this
section.
   (B)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to camp upon any:
      (1)   Non-residential private property without possessing authorization
of the property owner or the owner’s agent;
      (2)   Residential private property that has no permanent dwelling, or
that is lacking a potable water source and toilet facilities, without
possessing authorization of the property owner or the owner’s agent;
      (3)   Residential private property that has a permanent dwelling and both
potable water source and toilet facilities, without possessing authorization of
the property owner or the owner’s agent;
      (4)   Public square, street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place.
   (C)   Defenses. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that a person
charged with violation of this section owns the property.
   (D)   Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.
   (E)   Any property on which camping occurs shall be subject to all other
ordinances of the City of Cleburne, including those related to zoning and
health and safety.
('68 Code, § 19-13) (Ord. 01-2025-05, passed 1-28-25)
§ 130.12 LOITERING.
   (A)   Definition. As used in this section, LOITERING shall mean remaining
idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending
time idly, loafing, or walking about aimlessly, and shall also include the
colloquial expression changing around.
   (B)   (1)   Certain types of loitering prohibited. No person shall loiter in
a public place in such manner as to:
         (a)   Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace;
         (b)   Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to
the comfort and repose of any person;
         (c)   Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;
         (d)   Obstruct, molest, or interfere with any person lawfully in any
public place.
      (2)   This division (B) shall include the making of unsolicited remarks
of an offensive, disgusting, or insulting nature or which are calculated to
annoy or disturb the person to, or in whose hearing, they are made.
   (C)   Request to leave. Whenever the presence of any person in any public
place is causing any of the conditions enumerated in division (B), any police
officer may order that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse
to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a
violation of this section.
('68 Code, § 19-14(a)-(c)) (Ord. 12-1982-51, passed 12-14-82)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.13 PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   DEVIATE SEXUAL INTERCOURSE. Any contact between the genitals of one person
and the mouth or anus of another person.
   SEXUAL CONTACT. Any touching of the anus, breast, or any part of the
genitals of another person with intent to arouse or gratify the sexual desire
of any person.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Includes deviate sexual intercourse, sexual contact, and
sexual intercourse.
   SEXUAL INTERCOURSE. Any penetration of the female sex organ by the male sex
organ.
   (B)   Prohibitions. A person commits an offense if he or she knowingly:
      (1)   Offers to engage, agrees to engage, or engages in sexual conduct
for a fee; or
      (2)   Solicits another in a public place to engage with him or her in
sexual conduct for hire.
   (C)   Offense established. An offense is established under division (B)(1)
whether the actor is to receive or pay a fee. An offense is established under
division (B)(2) whether the actor solicits a person to hire him or her or
offers to hire the person solicited.
   (D)   Penalty. An offense under this section is a Class B misdemeanor,
unless the actor has been convicted previously under this section, in which
event it is a Class A misdemeanor.
(Tex. Penal Code §§ 43.01 and 43.02) ('68 Code, § 19-17)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.14 MALES ENTERING OR USING LADIES' REST ROOM.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any male over ten-years old to go into or use
any ladies' toilet or rest room in any public building in this city.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to any person whose duty it is to see
that such toilet or rest room is kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (C)   A PUBLIC BUILDING, within the meaning of this section, is any building
to which the general public has access.
('68 Code, § 19-18)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.15 PORNOGRAPHIC MATERIAL; WHOLESALERS AND RETAILERS REQUIRED TO IDENTIFY
MATERIALS.
   (A)   It being brought to the attention of the City Council that certain
pornographic material, primarily but not limited to, reading material,
distribution of magazines and books classified “art” which contains therein
nudity and other pornography all of which such material may be obscene in the
minds of the majority of the people and detrimental to the young children of
this city, and the distributor, either wholesaler or retailer, not being known
nor any method to determine who sold the material, the City Council is of the
opinion that this material hereinabove referred to is affecting the welfare of
the citizens of the city, and that such distributors should be known.
   (B)   To determine the distributor and retailer of material described in
division (A), henceforth after the passage of this section, such wholesaler and
distributor of any material which may be classified pornographic, sold and
distributed for the purpose of art but which material involves and contains
nudity, obscenity or relates to sex in any manner, shall be required to stamp
on the inside back-cover of such material being sold, distributed or given
away, the name of the retailer and wholesaler from which such material is made
available to the public.
('68 Code, § 19-19.1(a),(b)) (Ord. passed 4-14-70; Am. Ord. 7-1991-21, passed
7-25-91)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.16 INHALANTS AND PROHIBITED INHALANTS; SALE AND USE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INHALANT.  Any glue, cement, paint, paint product, or any other product,
material or substance which contains one or more of the following volatile
solvents:
      (1)   Acetone;
      (2)   Amylacetate;
      (3)   Benzol or Benzene;
      (4)   Butyl Acetate;
      (5)   Butyl Alcohol;
      (6)   Carbon Tetrachloride;
      (7)   Chloroform;
      (8)   Cyclohexanone;
      (9)   Ethanol or Ethyl Alcohol;
      (10)    Ethyl Acetate;
      (11)    Hexane;
      (12)    Isopropanol or Isopropyl Alcohol;
      (13)   Isopropyl Acetate;
      (14)    Methyl “Cellosolve” Acetate;
      (15)    Methyl Ethyl Ketone;
      (16)    Methyl Isobutyl Ketone;
      (17)    Toluol or Toluene;
      (18)    Trichloroethylene;
      (19)    Tricresyl Phosphate;
      (20)    Xylol or Xylene; or
      (21)    Any other solvent, material, substance, chemical or combination
thereof having the property of releasing toxic vapors.
   KIT. Any collection of materials used for the construction of model
airplanes, model boats, model automobiles, model trains or other similar
assemblage of construction materials.
   MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
   PROHIBITED INHALANT.
      (1)   Any inhalant which has been so designated by the City Council. The
City Council may designate an inhalant as a “prohibited inhalant” by resolution
only after holding a public hearing and finding that such inhalant is being
used by minors to violate the provisions of this section and that such inhalant
is sold without restriction to minors. This designation may be removed by the
City Council after holding a public hearing and finding that the prohibited
inhalant is no longer being used by minors to violate the provisions of this
section.
      (2)   Under the authority of this section, model glue or cement and
acrylic paint, both defined as “inhalants” by this section, are hereby
designated “prohibited inhalants.” This designation shall not include model
glue or cement that is labeled “nontoxic.”
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly and intentionally to
sell or otherwise transfer possession of any type of prohibited inhalant to any
minor for any purpose whatsoever, unless at the time of the sale or other
transfer of possession the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian.
   (C)   The provisions of division (B) above shall not apply where the
prohibited inhalant is sold, delivered or given simultaneously with and as a
part of a kit used for the construction of model airplanes, model automobiles,
model trains or other similar models.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to inhale or to otherwise induce
into his respiratory or circulatory system any “inhalant” as herein defined,
with the intent of becoming intoxicated, elated, dazed, paralyzed, irrational
or in any manner changing or distorting his eyesight, thinking process,
judgment, balance or coordination.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry upon his person an
inhalant as herein defined, unless the same is being transported from the place
of purchase to his place of residence or business, or is a part of a kit as
herein defined. Provided, that this shall not prohibit the use of the same at
the residence or place of business of such person in connection with the
inhalant's proper and intended use.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally to possess, buy,
sell or otherwise transfer any inhalant as herein defined for the purpose of
inducing or aiding any other person to violate the provisions of divisions (D)
and (E) of this section.
('68 Code, § 19-26) (Ord. 11-1978-54, passed 11-14-78; Am. Res. 11-1978-54A,
passed 11-14-78)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.17 POLICE IDENTIFICATION NUMBERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, deface, change, erase or
mutilate, for the purpose and intent of changing the identity, any police
identification number that has been permanently inscribed, etched, affixed or
attached to any article of personal property by the owner for the purpose of
identification. It shall also be unlawful for any person to have in his
possession any article of personal property, knowing that the police
identification number placed on same by the owner for the purpose and intent of
identification had been altered, changed, defaced, erased or mutilated, for the
purpose and intent of changing the identity of the article of personal
property.
('68 Code, § 19-25(c)) (Ord. 3-1973-12, passed 3-13-72; Am. Ord. 7-1991-21,
passed 7-25-91)
Penalty, see § 130.99
Cross-reference:
   Police identification register, see §
33.01
§ 130.18 [RESERVED].
§ 130.19 [RESERVED].
§ 130.20 POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON CITY PROPERTY AND
IN CERTAIN AREAS ADJACENT TO PARKS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. An alcoholic beverage as defined in the State
Alcoholic Beverage Code.
      CITY PROPERTY. Any real property or any facilities owned by or leased to
the city, and includes, but is not limited to, city parks.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or possess an alcoholic
beverage:
      (1)   On any city property; and/or
      (2)   On a public street, sidewalk, or parking area adjacent to a city
park.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply if:
      (1)   The person is on the following property:
         (a)   Cleburne Municipal Golf Course;
         (b)   Property that the city has leased to a tenant for a term of six
months or more; or
         (c)   Property where a special event, activity, or program is being
conducted with written permission of the City Manager, or his or her designee,
upon recommendation of the Chief of Police, and possession, consumption and/or
sale according to the authority as set forth by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Commission (TABC) license regulations of an alcoholic beverage is allowed under
the terms of the permission.
      (2)   The container of alcoholic beverage possessed by the person has an
unbroken seal or other evidence of never having been opened.
(Ord. 6-2002-42, passed 6-25-02; Am. Ord. 10-2014-85, passed 10-14-14) Penalty,
see §
130.99
§ 130.21 NOISE AS NUISANCE.
   (A)   Any unreasonably loud, disturbing, or unnecessary noise which causes
material distress, discomfort, or injury to persons of ordinary sensibilities
is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
   (B)   Any noise of such character, intensity, and continued duration which
substantially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of private homes by
persons of ordinary sensibilities is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is
prohibited.
   (C)   Nuisances which are prohibited under this section include, but are not
limited to:
      (1)   The playing of a radio, phonograph or other musical device or
instrument in such manner or with such volume, during the hours between 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and during the hours between 8:00
p.m. and noon Saturday and Sunday, as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort,
or repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities in a dwelling, hotel, business,
church or other structure occupied which is effected by loud music;
      (2)   The use of a loudspeaker or amplifier of such intensity that annoys
and disturbs persons of ordinary sensibilities;
      (3)   The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or
long, continued noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person of
ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity;
      (4)   The continued or frequent sounding of any horn or signal device on
any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle except as a danger or warning
signal; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably
loud or harsh noise for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
      (5)   The running of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of
repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating,
grinding, jarring, or rattling noise or vibrations;
      (6)   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler,
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of
danger;
      (7)   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle, or boat engine, except
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises;
      (8)   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless
the noise to be created is effectively muffled and reduced;
      (9)   The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration, or
repair work, on any building other than between the hours of sunrise and
sunset, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and
convenience, and then only by permit from the City Council, which permit may be
renewed by the Council during the time the emergency exists;
      (10)   The creation of any excessive noise on a street adjacent to a
school or institution of learning, while such school or institution of learning
is in session, or adjacent to a hospital, which unreasonably interferes with
the workings of such institutions, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in
a manner indicating that the street is a school or hospital street;
      (11)   The creation of any loud and excessive noise in connection with
the loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction of
bales, boxes, crates, and containers;
      (12)   The raucous shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors
which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood;
      (13)   The use of any bell, drum, loudspeaker, whistle or other
instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of
noise to any performance, show, or sale of merchandise;
      (14)   The parking or storage between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. of any motor vehicle, with any motor affixed thereto, left in operation,
for a period in excess of one hour, within a distance of 200 feet from any
dwelling;
      (15)   The operation or control of a motor vehicle in either a public or
private place within the city and operating any sound device which is part of,
or connected to, any radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player, cassette tape
player, or other similar device in the motor vehicle, in such a manner that,
when operated, it is audible at a distance of 50 feet, or when operated, causes
a person to be aware of the vibration accompanying the sound at a distance of
50 feet from the source when such operation is done in a manner which causes a
disturbance.
   (D)   Exemptions. The following sources of potential noise disturbances
shall be exempt from the regulations of this article:
      (1)   Safety signals, storm warning sirens or horns and the testing of
such equipment, emergency vehicle sirens or horns used when responding to an
emergency, and emergency pressure relief valves;
      (2)   Sound caused in the performance of emergency or public service
work, including police, fire and public utility operations, acting in the
performance of lawful duties to protect the health, safety or welfare of the
community;
      (3)   Activities conducted on public parks and playgrounds which are
approved, sponsored or sanctioned by the city. Activities conducted on public
or private school grounds including, but not limited to, school athletic and
school entertainment events which are approved, sponsored or sanctioned by the
school. The Depot at Cleburne Station shall not be treated as a public park for
purposes of gaining an exemption under this article;
      (4)   (a)   Those activities listed under this section that are conducted
within the Depot at Cleburne Station are exempt so long as they are conducted
during the following hours:
            Sunday - Thursday: From 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
            Friday and Saturday: From 7:00 a.m. to midnight
         (b)   Any activities listed under this section that are conducted
within the Depot at Cleburne Station shall not be exempt and shall create a
noise disturbance per se if conducted outside of the times listed in this
division. If there is any form of cessation in the noise disturbance or if a
new person, firm, corporation, or business entity becomes the originator of the
noise disturbance, the noise disturbance that follows such a cessation or
change in the originator shall constitute a separate offense; and
      (5)   The City Manager may provide additional exemptions to this section
upon written request by an event organizer.
(Ord. 6-2002-43, passed 6-25-02; Am. Ord. 7-2002-49, passed 7-23-02; Am. Ord.
05-2017-27, passed 5-9-17) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.22 SEXUAL OFFENDER: RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Findings and intent. Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders that
use physical violence and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual
predators who present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders
are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses and
most sexual offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are
ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This
makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to society at large, while
incalculable, clearly exorbitant. It is the intent of §§
130.22 and
130.23 to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas
around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers
wherein certain sexual offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from
establishing temporary or permanent residences.
   (B)   Definitions.  The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in
this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
      PERMANENT RESIDENCE. A place where the person abides, lodges or resides
for 14 or more consecutive days.
      PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL.  Any man-made, permanently installed or non-
portable structure, basin, chamber, or tank containing an artificial body of
water that is used for swimming, diving, aquatic sports, or other aquatic
activity other than a residential pool that is operated by an owner, lessee,
operator, a licensee or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged
for use. The pool may be either publically or privately owned. The term does
not include a spa or a decorative fountain that is not used a pool.
      TEMPORARY RESIDENCE.  A place where the person abides, lodges or resides
for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and
which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person
routinely abides, resides or lodges for a period of four or more consecutive or
nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent
residence.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person who is required to register as a sex
offender under Chapter 62 of the Tex. Code of Crim. Proc., to establish a
permanent residence or temporary residence within 2,000 feet of a public or
private school, day care facility, playground, public or private youth center,
public swimming pool or video arcade facility, as those terms are defined in
Tex. Health and Safety Code Article 481.134.
   (D)   For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the
measurement of the distance between the place of the person's residence and the
day care facility, playground, public or private youth center, public swimming
pool or video arcade facility shall be along the property lines of the street
fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across
intersections. The measurement of the distance between the person's residence
and the public or private school shall be:
      (1)   In a direct line from the property line of the public or private
school to the property line of the person's residence, and in a direct line
across intersections; or
      (2)   If the person's residence is located on or above the fifth story of
a multistory building, in a direct line from the property line of the public or
private school to the property line of the person's residence, in a direct line
across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to
the base of the floor on which the person's residence is located.
   (E)   Exceptions. A person residing within 2,000 feet of those places
identified in division (C) above does not commit a violation of this section if
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person established the permanent or temporary residence and has
complied with all the sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas,
prior to the date of the adoption of this section;
      (2)   The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was
not convicted as an adult;
      (3)   The person is a minor; or
      (4)   The premises specified in division (C) above was opened after the
person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all
sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas.
(Ord. 06-2006-51, passed 6-27-06; Am. Ord. 12-2011-67, passed 12-13-11)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.23 PROPERTY OWNERS PROHIBITED FROM RENTING REAL PROPERTY TO SEXUAL
OFFENDERS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof,
manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it
will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person
prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence
pursuant to the terms of §
130.22, if such place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer,
or other conveyance, is located within 2,000 feet of any public or private
school, day care facility, playground, public or private youth center, public
swimming pool, or video arcade facility, as those terms are defined in Tex.
Health and Safety Code Article 481.134.
   (B)   The determination of the distance between the residence described in
division (A) above and the public or private school, day care facility,
playground, public or private youth center, public swimming pool or video
arcade facility shall be the same as described in §
130.22(D).
(Ord. 06-2006-51, passed 6-27-06; Am. Ord. 12-2011-67, passed 12-13-11)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.24 PREPAYMENT FOR FUEL AT RETAIL FUEL BUSINESS.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      EMPLOYEE. Person(s) other than the owner or manager/supervisor employed
to perform services on the premises of a retail fuel business who have no
supervisory responsibilities.
      MANAGER/SUPERVISOR. The person(s) granted authority or responsibility by
the owner for the operations of the retail fuel business.
      OWNER. The individual, group, corporation, partnership, joint venture, or
other group or entity that owns a retail fuel business.
      PAYMENT. Payment by any legal means including cash, credit card, debit
card, check or otherwise. Presenting a form of payment to be finalized at the
conclusion of the transaction shall be considered payment in full.
   (B)   Prepayment required for gasoline or diesel fuel dispensed at a retail
fuel business; offenses; defense.
      (1)   It shall be an offense for a retail fuel business owner, manager/
supervisor, or employee to:
         (a)   Activate any gasoline or diesel fuel pumping device prior to
receiving payment in full for the gasoline or diesel fuel.
         (b)   Allow or permit any person to dispense gasoline or diesel fuel
from a pumping device at a retail fuel business unless the person has first
made payment in full.
      (2)   It shall be a defense if the owner, manager/supervisor or employee
of a retail fuel business allows the dispensing of gasoline or diesel fuel for
repair and/or testing of the dispensing devices used by the retail fuel
business.
(Ord. 09-2006-77, passed 9-12-06)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.25 USE OF SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES AND ROLLER BLADES PROHIBITED ON
DESIGNATED PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard, roller
skates, or roller blades upon any paved areas of property owned by the city
where signs are prominently posted, as provided below, expressly prohibiting
such conduct.
   (B)   Owners or managers of restaurants, businesses, office buildings,
churches, schools, or shopping centers may prohibit persons from riding a
skateboard, roller skates or roller blades on sidewalks and parking lots on
such property by prominently posting a sign, as provided below, expressly
prohibiting such conduct.
   (C)   The signs referred to in divisions (A) and (B) above shall bear the
following legend:
USE OF SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES OR ROLLER BLADES ON THESE PREMISES IS
UNLAWFUL AND PUNISHABLE BY A FINE UP TO $500.00. CLEBURNE CITY CODE, SECTION
130.25.
Words on the signs shall be in letters not less than one inch high, in a bold
color sharply contrasting with the background color of the sign, and shall be
located in a place or places visible from the areas affected by the
prohibition.
(Ord. 04-2010-16, passed 4-13-10)
§ 130.26 RESTRICTED SMOKING MATERIALS.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      RESTRICTED SMOKING MATERIAL.
      (1)   Any substance, however marketed, which can reasonably be converted
for smoking purposes whether it is presented as incense, tobacco, herbs, spices
or any blend thereof it if includes any of the following chemicals or a
comparable chemical:
         (a)    Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A; all parts of the plant
presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not,
the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound,
manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plants, its
seeds or extracts;
         (b)   2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol
(also known as CP47,497) and homologues;
         (c)   (6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-
yl)-6a,7,10,10a- tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-o1) (also known as HU-211 or
Dexanabinol);
         (d)   1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-018);
         (e)   1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-073); or
         (f)   1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-081).
      (2)   Products containing some of the above substances are currently
being marketed under the following commercial names:
         "K-2," "K-2 SUMMIT," "K-2 SEX," "GENIE," "DASCENTS," "ZOHAI," "SAGE,"
"SPICE," "KO KNOCK-OUT 2," "SPICE GOLD," "SPICE DIAMOND," "YUCATAN FIRE,"
"SOLAR FLARE," "PEP SPICE," "FIRE N' ICE," AND "SALVIA DIVINORUM" .
      (3)   It is anticipated by the council that new products will be marketed
under different names but will be subject to this definition if they contain
any of the chemical components set forth above.
   (B)   Restricted smoking materials; purpose. The purpose of this section is
to prohibit the sale or delivery of restricted smoking materials as defined
herein to any individual below 21 years of age within the city limits of the
City of Cleburne and to prohibit the possession of restricted smoking materials
by any individual below 21 years of age within the city limits of the City of
Cleburne. Any form of delivery to include a simple gift constitutes a violation
of this section.
   (C)   Sale, delivery, offer, or gift. It shall be unlawful for any person to
sell, offer to sell, deliver to or to give any restricted smoking material to
anyone below 21 years of age.
   (D)   Use or possession of restricted smoking material. It shall be unlawful
for any person below 21 years of age to have in their possession or to use
restricted smoking materials within the corporate limits of the City of
Cleburne.
   (E)   Defenses to prosecution.
      (1)   It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this
section if the use of the restricted smoking material is at the direction of or
under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to
prescribe controlled substances within the State of Texas.
      (2)   It shall be a defense to prosecution under the terms of this
section if an individual charged with a violation can provide proper and
complete historic documentation that the use of such materials is a portion of
a religious undertaking or activity of a religious denomination in which they
have long standing historic membership supported by documentation from clergy
or spiritual leader recognized by the State of Texas.
(Ord. 07-2010-47, passed 7-27-10) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.27 RETURNED CHECK CHARGE.
   On return of a payment device to the city following dishonor of the payment
device by a payor, the city, its assignee, agent, or representative, or any
other person retained by the city to seek collection of the face value of the
dishonored payment device may charge the drawer or endorser a processing fee of
$25.
(Ord. 04-2016-16, passed 4-12-16)
PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
§ 130.60 DEFINITIONS.
   The words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in §
96.01 of this code.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 130.61 GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person to store or park a motor vehicle, boat,
personal watercraft, trailer, or recreational vehicle on an unimproved surface
on any property within the city. The parking space and access driveway must be
continuous from an existing driveway, roadway, or rear alley.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to drive, stop, stand, or park a
vehicle, construction equipment, or recreational equipment onto or upon
privately owned property, without the consent of the owner, lessee, or person
in possession of the privately owned property.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 130.62 RESIDENTIAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   With the exception of authorized emergency vehicles, all vehicles stored or
parked on residential properties shall conform to the following restrictions:
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to store or park a motor vehicle on or
in any space, garage, carport, or other storage space or structure on a
residential zoned property if the motor vehicle is:
      (1)   A heavy load vehicle;
      (2)   Equipped with more than two axles;
      (3)   Greater than eight feet in height;
      (4)   Designed to carry more than 15 passengers; or
      (5)   Designed, used, or maintained primarily to transport property.
   (B)   It is unlawful for a person to store or park a trailer or boat on or
in any space on property zoned MF Multifamily unless the trailer or boat is
stored or parked within a separate approved storage facility or area on the
property or at an approved off-site location.
   (C)   Trailers and boats stored or parked at a separate storage facility or
area on a MF zoned property shall comply with division (D).
   (D)   It is unlawful for a person to store or park a trailer or boat on or
in any space, garage, carport, or other storage space or structure on a single-
family SF zoned property if the trailer or boat is greater than:
      (1)   16,000 pounds GVWR;
      (2)   Eight feet in height; or
      (3)   Twenty-four feet in length.
   (E)   In addition to the restrictions in division (D), it is unlawful for a
person to store or park a trailer or boat in the front yard or side yard of a
Single Family SF zoned property unless the trailer or boat is:
      (1)   Parked from the side property line a distance greater than or equal
to the required side yard setback of the property;
      (2)   Parked on an improved surface;
      (3)   Less than 36 inches in height if parked within the driver’s line of
sight zone required by city ordinance.
   (F)   In addition to the restrictions in division (D), it is unlawful for a
person to store or park a trailer or boat in the rear yard of a Single Family
SF zoned property unless the trailer is:
      (1)   Parked three or more feet from any adjacent property line; and
      (2)   Parked on an improved surface.
   (G)   Boat height is measured with the boat on the trailer. Boat length is
measured excluding the length of the boat trailer. Trailer length is measured
excluding the hitch.
   (H)   It is unlawful for a person to store or park construction equipment on
or in any space, garage, carport, trailer, or other storage space or structure
on a residential property. It is a defense to prosecution if the construction
equipment is operated, stored, or parked at a designated construction site.
   (I)   It is unlawful for a person to store or park more than one trailer in
the front and/or side yard of a Single Family SF zoned property.
   (J)   It is unlawful for a person to store or park more than one boat in the
front and/or side yard of a Single Family SF zoned property.
   (K)   It is unlawful for a person to store or park more than two trailers or
two boats outside an enclosed building on a Single Family SF zoned property
with an area less than or equal to 10,000 square feet. It is unlawful for a
person to store or park more than four trailers or four boats outside an
enclosed building on a Single Family SF zoned property with an area greater
than 10,000 square feet. It is a defense to prosecution if the trailer is
stored or parked on a property zoned Agricultural A.
   (L)   It is unlawful for a person to store or park recreational equipment
outside an enclosed building that is dismantled or inoperative due to
mechanical failure, collision, or dilapidation;
   (M)   It is unlawful for a person to store or park trailers containing
rubbish or garbage loaded with construction equipment or loaded with other
items in violation of the outside storage ordinance on any residential
property.
   (N)   It is unlawful for a person to store materials or items of any nature
on or beneath motor vehicles, trailers, watercraft, recreational vehicles, or
recreational equipment parked or stored on residential property.
   (O)   Parking spaces and access driveways shall be designed and constructed
in such a manner to properly support the gross weight of all vehicles parked on
the space, prohibit weed growth through the surface and prevent the seepage of
oil, fuel and other vehicle fluids into the ground.
   (P)   Parking spaces and access driveways within a residential area shall be
classified as:
      (1)   Existing parking space;
      (2)   New parking space; or
      (3)   Modified parking space.
   (Q)   Existing parking spaces are those parking spaces and access driveways
legally constructed prior to April 25, 2023. Existing parking spaces may be
constructed of concrete, asphalt, concrete or brick pavers, rock and/or gravel.
Maintenance of an existing parking space shall be made with the same surface
material as the existing parking space, but replacement of an existing parking
space shall meet the requirements for a new parking space.
   (R)   New parking spaces are those parking spaces constructed on or after
March 25, 2023 and are not contiguous with an existing parking space. New
parking spaces shall conform to the following requirements:
      (1)   Parking spaces and access driveways constructed of asphalt shall be
constructed with a minimum of four inches of full-depth asphalt or two inches
of asphalt on top of six inches of packed granular aggregate for the subbase;
      (2)   Parking spaces and access driveways constructed of concrete shall
be constructed with a minimum of six inches of reinforced concrete.
   (S)   Modified parking spaces are additional parking spaces added to an
existing parking space and:
      (1)   The added parking space or access driveway shall be contiguous with
eight or more lineal feet of an existing parking space or access driveway;
      (2)   The surface material of the added parking space and access
driveways shall match the type of material of the existing parking space
contiguous with the added space;
      (3)   Unless an approved circular drive is installed, the additional
parking space shall not exceed eight feet in width and the total surface area
of all existing and added parking space shall not exceed 50% of the surface
area of the front yard;
      (4)   Parking spaces and access driveways constructed of rock and/or
gravel shall be constructed with a minimum of six inches of packed road base
gravel and shall be contained by a rigid border to prevent the rock or gravel
from spreading beyond the improved surface area;
      (5)   Parking spaces and access driveways constructed of asphalt shall be
constructed with a minimum of four inches of full-depth asphalt or two inches
of asphalt on top of six inches of packed granular aggregate for the subbase;
      (6)   Parking spaces and access driveways constructed of brick pavers or
concrete pavers shall be constructed with a minimum of six inches of packed
granular aggregate for the subbase;
   (T)   Parking spaces and access driveways constructed of concrete shall be
constructed with a minimum of six inches of reinforced concrete.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 130.63 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING.
   Parking or storage of recreational vehicles shall conform to the following
restrictions:
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to store or park any recreational
vehicle on a vacant lot or lot without a main structure within the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to store or park a recreational vehicle
(RV) on any property not zoned Single Family SF.
      (1)   It is a defense to prosecution if the property used for storing or
parking a recreational vehicle is an approved RV Park, RV storage facility, RV
sales facility, or RV service facility.
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution if the RV is legally parked at an
operating hotel or motel parking area, provided the RV is not parked on the
property for more than seven days in a 60 day period.
      (3)   It is a defense to prosecution if the RV is stored or parked on
public property, at an educational institution, a religious institution, or a
property zoned commercial or industrial provided the RV is not parked or stored
more than 48 hours in a 30 day period. The 48 hour limit shall be a cumulative
amount of time stored or parked on all such properties to prohibit moving an RV
from lot to lot.
      (4)   It is a defense to prosecution if the city issues a temporary
permit to store or park an RV for an approved business use.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to store or park more than one
recreational vehicle outside an enclosed building on a property zoned Single
Family SF.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to occupy a recreational vehicle (RV)
for sleeping or living purposes on any property within the city.
      (1)   It is a defense to prosecution if the RV is legally stored or
parked at an approved RV park.
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution if the city issues a temporary
permit to occupy an RV for an approved business use.
      (3)   It is a defense to prosecution if the RV is legally stored or
parked on a property zoned Single Family SF and the RV is not used for sleeping
or living purposes for more than seven days in a 30 day period.
   (E)   It is unlawful for a person to store or park any recreational vehicle
within the driver’s line of sight area as defined by city ordinance.
   (F)   It is unlawful for a person to store or park any RV on a parking space
not constructed of reinforced concrete or asphalt. It is unlawful for a person
to store or park a recreational vehicle on a surface not capable of
withstanding both the static and live load of the recreational vehicle.
   (G)   It is unlawful for a person to store or park a recreational vehicle
where the recreational vehicle may come in contact with or create an unsafe
condition with overhead power lines.
   (H)   It is unlawful to store or park a recreational vehicle with an
exterior length less than 26 feet on any lot zoned Single Family SF within the
city unless the RV:
      (1)   Is parked ten or more feet from the side right-of-way line on a
corner lot;
      (2)   If stored or parked in the front yard or side yard of the property,
the RV is stored or parked a distance from the side property line equal to or
greater than the required side yard setback; or
      (3)   If stored or parked in the rear yard of the property, the RV is
stored or parked five or more feet from any adjacent property line.
   (I)   It is unlawful to store or park a recreational vehicle with an
exterior length equal to or greater than 26 feet or a gross vehicle weight
rating (GVWR) greater than 16,000 pounds on any lot zoned Single Family SF
within the city unless the RV:
      (1)   Is stored or parked on a lot with an area equal to or greater than
10,000 square feet;
      (2)   Is stored or parked at least 20 feet from the side right-of-way
line on a corner lot;
      (3)   If stored or parked in the side yard of the property, the RV is
stored or parked a distance from the side property line equal to or greater
than the required side yard setback and the RV is stored or parked behind the
rearmost portion of the façade of the house or at least 35 feet from the front
right-of-way, whichever distance is greater; or
      (4)   If stored or parked in the rear yard of a property, the RV is
stored or parked seven or more feet from any adjacent property line.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 130.64 IMPOUNDMENT OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT.
   Any peace officer is given authority to tow or cause to be towed to the city
impound lot or other place designated as an impound lot, any vehicle,
recreational vehicle, trailer, recreational equipment, construction equipment,
or watercraft which is parked in violation of any of the provisions of this
code or any other ordinance of the city and there kept until its redemption
shall be made by the owner or his duly authorized agent after payment to the
city the sum of $100, together with all other costs of removal and storage that
may have accrued thereon. If any vehicle, recreational vehicle, trailer,
recreational equipment, construction equipment, or watercraft is stored on the
city impound lot, the storage fee shall accrue at a daily rate set by the city
fee schedule.
(Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It is an offense for a person, firm, company, or corporation to
violate, disobey, omit, neglect, refuse to comply with, or resist the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter. Each day that a violation
occurs or is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. An offense
under this subsection that is not otherwise classified by this section is a
Class C misdemeanor. Any offense under this subsection for which no other
penalty is set forth in this chapter shall be subject to the penalty set forth
in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   It is an offense for a person, firm, company, or corporation to
violate, disobey, omit, neglect, refuse to comply with, or resist the
enforcement of any provision of §
130.17 of this chapter. Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense. A violation of this subsection is a
Class C misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine of no more than $500 for each
offense.
   (C)   It is an offense for a person, firm, company, or corporation to fail
to comply with the conditions of §
130.15 of this chapter. It is an offense for a person, firm, company, or
corporation to sell any material described in §
130.15 of this chapter in a store or to possess any material described in §
130.15 of this chapter in the jurisdiction of the city that does not comply
with the conditions of §
130.15 of this chapter. Each day that a violation of this subsection occurs or
is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. A violation of this
subsection is a Class C misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine of no more than
$500 for each offense.
   (D)   It is an offense for a person, firm, company, or corporation to
violate, disobey, omit, neglect, refuse to comply with, or resist the
enforcement of any provision of §
130.12 of this chapter. Each day that a violation of this subsection occurs or
is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. A violation of this
subsection is a Class C misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine of not less
than $5 and no more than $500 for each offense.
   (E)   It is an offense for any person, firm, company, or corporation to
violate, disobey, omit, neglect, refuse to comply with, or resist the
enforcement of any provision of §
130.18 of this chapter. Each day that a violation of this subsection occurs or
is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. A violation of this
subsection is a Class C misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine of no more than
$500 for each offense.
   (F)   It is an offense for any person, firm, company, or corporation to
violate, disobey, omit, neglect, refuse to comply with, or resist the
enforcement of any provision of §§
130.22 or
130.23 of this chapter. Each day that a violation of this subsection occurs or
is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. A violation of this
subsection is a Class C misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine of no more than
$500 for each offense.
   (G)   It is an offense for any person, firm, company, or corporation to
knowingly perform an act prohibited by §
130.24 of this chapter or to knowingly fail to perform an act required by §
130.24 of this chapter. Each day that a violation of this subsection occurs or
is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. A violation of this
subsection is a Class C misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine of no more than
$500 for each offense.
   (H)   It is an offense for any person, firm, company, or corporation to
violate, disobey, omit, neglect, refuse to comply with, or resist the
enforcement of any provision of §
130.26 of this chapter. Each day that a violation of this subsection occurs or
is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. A violation of this
subsection is a Class C misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine of no more than
$500 for each offense.
(Ord. 10-1994-50, passed 10-11-94; Am. Ord. 10-1997-85, passed 10-14- 97; Am.
Ord. 2-2002-11, passed 2-26-02; Am. Ord. 06-2006-51, passed 6-27-06; Am. Ord.
09-2006-77, passed 9-12-06; Am. Ord. 09-2009-58, passed 9-22-09; Am. Ord. 04-
2010-14, passed 4-13-10; Am. Ord. 07- 2010-47, passed 7-27-10; Am. Ord. 10-
2015-65, passed 10-13-15; Am. Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      Chapter
         
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
         
151.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
         
152.   TRAILERS AND TRAILER PARKS
         
153.   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
         
154.   SUBDIVISIONS
         
155.   ZONING
            
APPENDIX:   ZONING ORDINANCE
         
156.   SIGN REGULATIONS
            
APPENDIX A:   ILLUSTRATIONS
         
157.   MANAGEMENT OF THE RIGHT-OF-WAY
         
158.   IMPACT FEES
Cross-reference:
   Oil and gas drilling; mineral exploration, see
Ch. 118
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Building lines for business structures on certain streets
   
150.002   Erection and use of scaffolds
   
150.003   Holes, ditches, and excavations to be protected during construction
work
   
150.004   House numbers
   
150.005   Paving permit required
Building Codes
   
150.015   Building codes adopted
   
150.016   Fees adopted
Mechanical Code
   
150.030   Adopted
   
150.031   Mechanical contractor's license, registration, and permit/inspection
requirements
   
150.032   Permits
   
150.033   Inspection requests
Fuel Gas Code
   
150.035   Adopted
Plumbing Code
   
150.040   Short title
   
150.041   Adopted
   
150.042   Plumber's license, registration, and permit/inspection requirements
   
150.043   Liability for damages
   
150.044   Backflow prevention and cross-connection control
   
150.045   Permits
   
150.046   Inspection requests
   
150.047   Minimum standards for installation of irrigation systems
   
150.048   [Reserved]
   
150.049   [Reserved]
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code
   
150.050   Adopted
Electrical Code
   
150.055   Short title
   
150.056   Electrical Board — created; powers and duties; appeals
   
150.057   National Electrical Code adopted
   
150.058   Electrical contractor's license, registration, and permit/inspection
requirements
   
150.059   Commercial general liability insurance
   
150.060   Information to be furnished by contractors and electricians
   
150.061   Work by homeowners
   
150.062 - 150.069   [Reserved.]
   
150.070   Liability for damages — responsibility
   
150.071   Electrical Inspector
   
150.072   Conflict of interest
   
150.073   Duties of Inspector
   
150.074   Inspection
   
150.075   Electrical contractor's and electrician's licenses
   
150.076   Licensee not to permit use of name or license by another
   
150.077   Unlicensed person on job; false representation
   
150.078   Performing and engaging in work other than that authorized by license
   
150.079   Revocation of license
   
150.080   Work permits
   
150.081   Reports of permits issued and fees paid; disposition of fees
collected
Industrialized Housing and Buildings
   
150.082   Applicability
   
150.083   Reservation of authority
   
150.084   Definitions
   
150.085   Building codes
   
150.086   On-site inspections
   
150.087   Regulation of industrialized housing and buildings
   
150.088   Regulation of single-family and duplex industrialized housing
Moving of Structures
   
150.090   Moving structures into and within the city prohibited
   
150.091   Overhead utility lines to be protected; notice to and duties of
owners of overhead utility lines
   
150.092   Dollies to have pneumatic tires
   
150.093   Lights required for night moving or stopping
   
150.094   Trees not to be damaged
   
150.095   Police escort
   
150.096   Permit required
   
150.097   Application
   
150.098.a   Registration required
   
150.098.b   Issuance of permit
   
150.099   Certificate of current tax status prerequisite
   
150.100   Bond and insurance
   
150.101   Fee
   
150.102   [Reserved]
   
150.103   Notice of adjacent property owners
   
150.104   Route
   
150.105   Inspection prior to issuing permit
Rental Housing
   
150.115   Purpose
   
150.116   Responsibility of owners and tenants
   
150.117   Maintenance of leased/let properties
   
150.118   Negligent properties
   
150.119   Occupancy requirements
   
150.120   Fuel gas system
   
150.121   Electrical system
Property Maintenance
   
150.140   Purpose
   
150.141   Codes adopted
   
150.142   Definitions
   
150.143   Substandard property
   
150.144   Commission created; membership; term of office
   
150.145   Authority of Commission
   
150.146   Notice of violations/public hearings
   
150.147   Commission proceedings
   
150.148   Findings of the Commission
   
150.149   Commission orders
   
150.150   Appeals
 
   
150.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Authority of city relative to building regulations, see Charter §
2.1(C)(11)
   Fire:
      Construction requirements in fire limits, see §
93.17
      Fire limits established, see §
93.16
      Prevention and protection in general; codes adopted, see
Ch. 93
   Lake Pat Cleburne, construction of piers and boat houses, see §§
98.125 et seq.
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 99
   Subdivision and development standards, see
Ch. 154
   Water and sewers,
Ch. 51
   Zoning, see
Ch. 155
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 BUILDING LINES FOR BUSINESS STRUCTURES ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, construct or place any
building or structure designed or intended to be used for business purposes of
any kind closer than 50 feet of the centerline of that portion of North Anglin
Street running between Wilson Street and Lone Star Avenue, and closer than 30
feet of the centerline of that portion of the following named streets running
between North Main Street and North Anglin Street: Wilson Street, Heath Street,
McCoy Avenue, Ross Avenue, May Avenue, McArthur Lane and Lone Star Avenue.
('68 Code, § 6-2) (Ord. passed 8-9-56)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.002 ERECTION AND USE OF SCAFFOLDS.
   Any person who shall erect or use, or cause to be erected or used, any
scaffold in the erection of any building, unless the same is well and safely
supported and of sufficient width and properly secured, so as to insure the
safety of persons working thereon, or passing under or by the same, against the
falling thereof, or of such material as may be used, placed or deposited
thereon, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('68 Code, § 6-9)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.003 HOLES, DITCHES, AND EXCAVATIONS TO BE PROTECTED DURING CONSTRUCTION
WORK.
   Any person having charge of any public or private improvement in this city,
who shall leave any hole, ditch or excavation, in or adjoining any public
square, street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, without guarding,
covering or fencing the same, so as to prevent persons and animals from falling
therein, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('68 Code, § 6-10)
Penalty, see § 150.999
Cross-reference:
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 99
§ 150.004 HOUSE NUMBERS.
   (A)   (1)   There shall be placed on all houses a number easily seen from
the street, and every 24-foot space fronting on a street or avenue in business
areas and every 50-foot space fronting on a street or avenue in residential
areas shall be entitled to a number.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the owner of the house to put the proper
number on it so the number can easily be seen from the street, and any person
failing to do this, within ten days after having been notified so to do by the
Chief of Police, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the City Building Inspector to give to every
person who so requests the proper number to be placed on his house.
   (C)   The Director of Public Works shall designate the place of beginning on
all streets, and all numbers on right-hand side of each street, from place of
beginning, shall be even numbers and all on the left-hand side shall be odd
numbers.
('68 Code, § 6-11) (Am. Ord. 6-1979-29, passed 6-12-79)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.005 PAVING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Requirements. Any person who shall pave, or cause to be paved or
construct or cause to construct an area greater than 120 square feet without
first obtaining a building permit shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Required paving shall include any area covered with a hard surface which may be
used for vehicle or pedestrian travel, vehicle parking, or recreational areas
such as tennis courts, basketball courts or the like. Required paving shall
exclude the portion of driveways located on private property in R-1 and R-
2 Zoning Districts.
   (B)   Paving permit fee. See §
150.016.
(Ord. 2-1994-12, passed 2-24-94; Am. Ord. 12-2002-87, passed 12-10-02)
Penalty, see § 150.999(C)
BUILDING CODES
§ 150.015 BUILDING CODES ADOPTED.
   (A)   The city hereby adopts the 2021 edition of the International Building
Code. Copies of the code and the amendments thereto, as referenced in this
section, are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent record
and inspection. In addition thereto, the city hereby adopts the recommended
amendments to the 2021 International Building Code prepared by the North
Central Texas Council of Governments, which are attached to Ordinance OR10-
2022-75 as "Exhibit A - 150.015(A)". The exhibit is not set out herein, but is
on file and available for inspection in the office of the City Secretary. The
chief building official, or his authorized representative, is hereby authorized
and directed to enforce all provisions of the International Building Code, as
adopted herein and as amended.
   (B)   The city hereby adopts the 2021 edition of International Residential
Code. Copies of the code and the amendments thereto, as referenced in this
section, are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent record
and inspection. In addition thereto, the city hereby adopts the recommended
amendments to the 2021 International Residential Code prepared by the North
Central Texas Council of Governments, which are attached to Ordinance OR10-
2022-75 as "Exhibit A - 150.015(B)". The exhibit is not set out herein, but is
on file and available for inspection in the office of the City Secretary. The
chief building official, or his authorized representative, is hereby authorized
and directed to enforce all provisions of International Residential Code, as
adopted herein and as amended.
   (C)   The city hereby adopts the 2021 edition of International Energy
Conservation Code. Copies of the code and the amendments thereto, as referenced
in this section, are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent
record and inspection. In addition thereto, the city hereby adopts the
recommended amendments to the 2021 International Energy Conservation Code
prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, which are attached
to Ordinance OR10-2022-75 as "Exhibit A - 150.015(C)". The exhibit is not set
out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
City Secretary. The chief building official, or his authorized representative,
is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the
International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted herein and as amended.
   (D)   The city hereby adopts the 2021 edition of the International Existing
Building Code. Copies of the code and the amendments thereto, as referenced in
this section, are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent
record and inspection. In addition thereto, the city hereby adopts the
recommended amendments to the 2021 International Existing Building Code
prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, which are attached
to Ordinance OR10-2022-75 as "Exhibit A - Section 150.015(D)". The exhibit is
not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office
of the City Secretary. The chief building official, or his authorized
representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of
the International Existing Building Code, as adopted herein and as amended.
('68 Code, § 6-3) (Ord. passed 3-9-52; Am. Ord. 3-1984-10, passed 3-13-84; Am.
Ord. 3-1989-08, passed 3-21-89; Am. Ord. 9-1991-30, passed 9-26-91; Am. Ord. 7-
1996-34, passed 7-23-96; Am. Ord. 7-1996- 34, passed 7-23-96; Am. Ord. 9-1997-
77, passed 9-23-97; Am. Ord. 12- 2001-90, passed 12-11-01; Am. Ord. 8-2002-55,
passed 8-13-02; Am. Ord. 05-2004-20, passed 5-11-04; Am. Ord. 05-2004-21,
passed 5-11-04; Am. Ord. 07-2004-39, passed 7-13-04; Am. Ord. 10-2011-57,
passed 10-25-11; Am. Ord. 10-2013-61, passed 10-8-13; Am. Ord. 10-2013-62,
passed 10-8-13; Am. Ord. 10-2013-66, passed 10-8-13; Am. Ord. 06- 2017-35,
passed 6-13-17; Am. Ord. 09-2017-53, passed 9-26-17; Am. Ord. 09-2017-54,
passed 9-26-17; Am. Ord. 09-2017-55, passed 9-26-17; Am. Ord. 09-2017-56,
passed 9-26-17; Am. Ord. 10-2022-75, passed 10-25-22) Penalty, see §
150.999
Cross-reference:
   Authority to provide and enforce a building code, Charter §
2.1(C)(11)
§ 150.016 FEES ADOPTED.
   (A)   Building permit fees for new construction, remodel and additions shall
be in accordance with the following schedule:
 NEW REMODEL
                       NEW                 REMODEL
RESIDENTIAL            .19                 .16
Carport, awning, porch .09 per square foot
COMMERCIAL
First 10,000 sq. ft    .23                 .20
Over 10,000 sq. ft.    .21                 .19
Carport, canopy, porch .11 per square foot
INDUSTRIAL
First 10,000 sq. ft.   .23                 .20
Over 10,000 sq. ft.    .21                 .19
 
   Note:   A $20 administrative fee is added to each of the above permits. The
minimum permit fee is $25. The fee for a re-inspection shall be $70 for
residential re-inspections and $85.50 for commercial re-inspections.
   (B)   Miscellaneous construction and licensing fees shall be in accordance
with the following schedule:
   MISCELLANEOUS CONSTRUCTION FEES
   MISCELLANEOUS CONSTRUCTION FEES
                                   1 - 50 sq. ft.    $37.50
Signs:                             51 - 100 sq. ft   62.50
Portable                           101 - 200 sq. f   125.00
Permanent                          Over 200 sq. ft   250.00
                                                        375.00
Swimming Pools                     Above Ground      37.50
                                   In Ground         100.00
Fences                             Above 6 feet      37.50
Drive Approach/Curb Cuts                                37.50
Certificate of Occupancy                                37.50
Reciprocal Letters                                      6.00
Roofing Permit                     Involving Decki   30.00
Demolition Permit                  Residential       37.50
                                   Commercial        62.50
OSSF Permit                                             500.00
Verification of existing system                         218.75
Moving Building Permit                                  62.50
 
   Note: A $20 administrative fee is added to each of the above permits. Re-
inspection fee shall be $25.
   LICENSE AND REGISTRATION - Required Annually
   LICENSE AND REGISTRATION - Required Annually
Master Electricians License           New     $100.00
                                      Renew   100.00
Journeyman Electricians License       New     100.00
                                      Renew   100.00
General Building Contractor                      100.00
Roofing Contractor Registration                  100.00
Siding Contractor                                100.00
Plumbers Registration                            100.00
Irrigators Registration                          100.00
Mechanical Contractor Registration               100.00
Concrete Contractor Registration                 100.00
OSSF Installer Registration                      100.00
Backflow Tester Registration                     100.00
 
(Ord. 7-1996-34, passed 7-23-96; Am. Ord. 11-1998-85, passed 11-24- 98; Am.
Ord. 9-2002-65, passed 9-10-02; Am. Ord. 12-2002-86, passed 12-10-02; Am. Ord.
06-2006-47, passed 6-13-06; Am. Ord. 06-2022-50, passed 6-28-22)
Penalty, see § 150.999(E)
MECHANICAL CODE
§ 150.030 ADOPTED.
   The city hereby adopts the 2021 edition of International Mechanical Code.
Copies of the code and the amendments thereto, as referenced in this section,
are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent record and
inspection. In addition thereto, the city hereby adopts the recommended
amendments to the 2021 International Mechanical Code prepared by the North
Central Texas Council of Governments, which are attached to Ordinance OR10-
2022-75 as "Exhibit A - Section 150.030". The exhibit is not set out herein,
but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the City
Secretary. The chief building official, or his authorized representative, is
hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of International
Mechanical Code, as adopted herein and as amended.
('68 Code, § 18½-1) (Ord. 3-1984-10, passed 3-13-84; Am. Ord. 3-1989-09, passed
3-21-89; Am. Ord. 9-1997-75, passed 9-23-97; Am. Ord. 05-2004-22, passed 5-11-
04; Am. Ord. 10-2013-64, passed 10-8-13; Am. Ord. 09-2017-58, passed 9-26-17;
Am. Ord. 10-2022-75, passed 10-25-22) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.031 MECHANICAL CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE, REGISTRATION, AND PERMIT/ INSPECTION
REQUIREMENTS.
   Any mechanical contractor licensed under the Texas Department of Licenses
and Regulations, before engaging in the business of mechanical work, must:
   (A)   Submit to the Building Inspections Department a copy of his or her
current state license;
   (B)   Register with the Building Inspections Department; and
   (C)   Have on file with the Building Inspections Department a copy of a
certificate of general liability insurance, written by an insurance company
licensed to do business in this state, which shall meet or exceed the following
requirements:
      (1)   Commercial general liability insurance in an amount not less than
$300,000 combined for property damage and bodily injury sustained by one or
more persons, $300,000 aggregate for products and completed operations. In the
event claims occur which reduce the required coverage to a level of $75,000 or
less, the licensee shall reinstate the coverage to the original amount or
greater.
      (2)   The products and completed operations liability shall cover the
public and the contractor from claims arising from an occurrence after the job
is completed.
      (3)   A license applicant or holder shall furnish to the city a
certificate of insurance as evidence of the insurance required in divisions (C)
(1) or (2) of this section. The license holder's name and address must be shown
as it appears on the license. Binders and interim certificates of less than 60
days will not be accepted.
      (4)   The certificate of insurance shall certify that the policy has been
endorsed with the provisions that in the event such coverage is canceled or
reduced, the insurance carrier shall notify the department at least 45 days
prior to such cancellation or reduction in coverage. Each non-renewal notice
shall also be submitted by the insurance carrier to the city at least 45 days
prior to the renewal date. In the event that coverage is canceled for non-
payment of premium, the insurance carrier shall notify the department at least
10 days prior to such cancellation.
      (5)   Certificates of insurance will be accepted only when signed by
those officers or agents of an insurance company empowered to sign such
certificates by the insurance company. The insured will obtain the names of
such officers or agents from the insurance companies and will provide a list of
such officers and agents with the other submissions required in this section.
(Ord. 3-2002-18, passed 3-26-02)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.032 PERMITS.
   (A)   No mechanical work will be done prior to obtaining a mechanical permit
from the Building Inspections Department. Requests for permits may be made in
person or online at the City of Cleburne website. All mechanical work will be
done in accordance with the rules and regulations as set forth in this chapter
and the contractor will comply in all respects with the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Payment will be made of any and all fees that may become due and owing
by the contractor. These fees may be billed to the contractor and paid by the
tenth of the following month, providing there is a signed authorization in the
Building Inspections Office listing all personnel authorized to call for
permits in the name of the company. A $25 late fee will be assessed to all
accounts not current by the tenth of the following month. Any account past due
more than 60 days will lose all billing rights for six months, and no permits
will be issued until the account is paid in full. All fees will be based upon
the currently adopted fee schedule in §
150.016.
(Ord. 3-2002-18, passed 3-26-02; Am. Ord. 10-2013-64, passed 10-8-13)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.033 INSPECTION REQUESTS.
   (A)   Requests for inspections. All inspection requests must be called in at
least 24 hours prior to the inspection. Requests should be made through the
Inspections Hotline number available 24 hours a day. Any inspection properly
called in before midnight will be scheduled for the next workday. Inspection
requests must include the address, mechanical contractor, permit number and
type of inspection. Emergency inspections such as gas tests, open sewer lines,
etc., can be made the same day.
   (B)   Failed/canceled inspections. Inspections that fail, are not ready, or
are canceled will be required to call in again to the inspection hotline.
Inspection cancellations must be called in to the hotline before 8:00 a.m. A
re-inspection fee will be charged for all failed inspections, or inspections
not ready by the third request.
(Ord. 3-2002-18, passed 3-26-02; Am. Ord. 10-2013-64, passed 10-8-13)
FUEL GAS CODE
§ 150.035   ADOPTED.
   The city hereby adopts the 2021 edition of International Fuel Gas Code.
Copies of the code and the amendments thereto, as referenced in this section,
are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent record and
inspection. In addition thereto, the city hereby adopts the recommended
amendments to the 2021 International Fuel Gas Code prepared by the North
Central Texas Council of Governments, which are attached to Ordinance OR10-
2022-75 as "Exhibit A - Section 150.035". The exhibit is not set out herein,
but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the City
Secretary. The chief building official, or his authorized representative, is
hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of International Fuel
Gas Code, as adopted herein and as amended.
(Am. Ord. 10-1998-73, passed 10-27-98; Am. Ord. 05-2004-23, passed 5- 11-04;
Am. Ord. 10-2013-63, passed 10-8-13; Am. Ord. 09-2017-59, passed 9-26-17; Am.
Ord. 10-2022-75, passed 10-25-22) Penalty, see §
150.999
PLUMBING CODE
§ 150.040 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Cleburne Plumbing
Code.”
('68 Code, § 22-1) (Ord. 3-1984-10, passed 3-13-84)
Cross-reference:
   Health and sanitation, see
Ch. 96
   Water and sewers, see
Ch. 51
Statutory reference:
   Cities to prescribe plumbing regulations, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art.
6243-101, § 15
§ 150.041 ADOPTED.
   The city hereby adopts the 2021 edition of International Plumbing Code.
Copies of the code and the amendments thereto, as referenced in this section,
are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent record and
inspection. In addition thereto, the city hereby adopts the recommended
amendments to the 2021 International Plumbing Code prepared by the North
Central Texas Council of Governments, which are attached to Ordinance OR10-
2022-75 as "Exhibit A - Section 150.041". The exhibit is not set out herein,
but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the City
Secretary. The chief building official, or his authorized representative, is
hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of International
Plumbing Code, as adopted herein and as amended.
('68 Code, § 22-2) (Ord. 3-1984-10, passed 3-13-84; Am. Ord. 6-1988-24, passed
6-14-88; Am. Ord. 9-1997-76, passed 9-23-97; Am. Ord. 8-1998-39, passed 8-11-
98; Am. Ord. 5-1999-53, passed 5-11-99; Am. Ord. 05-2004-24, passed 5-11-04;
Am. Ord. 04-2005-29, passed 4- 26-05; Am. Ord. 06-2008-35, passed 6-10-08; Am.
Ord. 03-2010-11, passed 3-9-10; Am. Ord. 10-2013-65, passed 10-8-13; Am. Ord.
09-2017- 60, passed 9-26-17; Am. Ord. 10-2022-75, passed 10-25-22) Penalty, see
§
150.999 
§ 150.042 PLUMBER'S LICENSE, REGISTRATION, AND PERMIT/INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any plumbing contractor or master plumber licensed under the Plumbing
License Law of the state, being Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6243-101, before
engaging in the business of plumbing work, must submit a copy of his or her
current state license; a copy of certificate of general liability insurance in
the amounts stated in division (B) of this section; and register with the
Building Inspections Department; and abide by the conditions described in this
section. Any mechanical contractor licensed under the Texas Department of
Licenses and Regulations, before engaging in the business of mechanical work,
must:
      (1)   Submit to the Building Inspections Department a copy of his current
state license;
      (2)   Register with the Building Inspections Department; and
      (3)   Have on file with the Building Inspections Department a copy of a
certificate of general liability insurance, written by an insurance company
licensed to do business in this state, which shall meet or exceed the following
requirements:
         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance in an amount not less
than $300,000 combined for property damage and bodily injury sustained by one
or more persons, $300,000 aggregate for products and completed operations. In
the event claims occur which reduce the required coverage to a level of $75,000
or less, the licensee shall reinstate the coverage to the original amount or
greater.
         (b)   The products and completed operations liability shall cover the
public and the contractor from claims arising from an occurrence after the job
is completed.
         (c)   A license applicant or holder shall furnish to the city a
certificate of insurance as evidence of the insurance required in subsections
(a) or (b) of this division (A). The license holder's name and address must be
shown as it appears on the license. Binders and interim certificates of less
than 60 days will not be accepted.
         (d)   The certificate of insurance shall certify that the policy has
been endorsed with the provisions that in the event such coverage is canceled
or reduced, the insurance carrier shall notify the Building Inspections
Department at least 45 days prior to such cancellation or reduction in
coverage. Each non-renewal notice shall also be submitted by the insurance
carrier to the city at least 45 days prior to the renewal date. In the event
that coverage is canceled for non-payment of premium, the insurance carrier
shall notify the Building Inspections Department at least 10 days prior to such
cancellation.
         (e)   Certificates of insurance will be accepted only when signed by
those officers or agents of an insurance company empowered to sign such
certificates by the insurance company. The insured shall obtain the names of
such officers or agents from the insurance companies and shall provide a list
of such officers and agents with the other submissions required in this
section.
   (B)   Master plumbers may present a certificate of insurance in lieu of a
bond, provided the certificate of insurance meets the following requirements:
      (1)   Be written by a company licensed to do business in this state;
      (2)   Provide for commercial and general liability for the master plumber
for claims for property damage or bodily injury, regardless whether the claim
arises from a negligence claim or on a contract claim; and
      (3)   Be in a coverage amount of not less than $300,000 for all claims
arising in a one-year period.
('68 Code, § 22-3) (Ord. 3-1984-10, passed 3-13-84; Am. Ord. 11-1995-41, passed
11-14-95; Am. Ord. 3-2002-16, passed 3-26-02)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.043 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.
   This subchapter shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating or installing any plumbing work
for damages to any person injured by any defects therein; nor shall the city or
any agent thereof be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the
inspection authorized herein or the certificate of inspection authorized herein
or the certificate of inspection issued by the Plumbing Inspector.
('68 Code, § 22-4) (Ord. 3-1984-10, passed 3-13-84)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.044 BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL.
   (A)   Backflow prevention and cross-connection standards. Every source of
contamination or possible contamination from any contaminant which originates
from or is located at a residential, commercial or industrial establishment,
which is connected to any public water supply shall be equipped with the
protection required under the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. If a word or term used in this section is not contained in the
following list, its definition, or other technical terms used, shall have the
meanings or definitions listed in the most recent adopted edition of the City
of Cleburne Plumbing Code and/or (M14) AWWA Manual of Water Supply Practices -
"Recommended Practice For Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection."
   AIR GAP. A physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a
potable water supply piping and/or appurtenance and an open or non-pressure
receiving vessel, plumbing fixture or other device. An "approved air-gap
separation" shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipe measured
vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel, plumbing fixture or other
device in no case less than one inch.
   ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE or ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM
BREAKER or "AVB." A device used to prevent backsiphonage in non-health hazard
conditions. This device cannot be tested and cannot prevent backpressure
backflow.
   AUXILIARY SUPPLY. Any water source or system other than the public water
system, that may be available in the building or on the property, including
ground water or surface waters used for industrial, irrigation or any other
purpose.
   BACKFLOW. The flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow or the
introduction of any foreign liquids, gases, or substances into the water system
of the city's water.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY or ASSEMBLY. An assembly to counteract back
pressure or prevent backsiphonage.
   BACKPRESSURE. Any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by
any means) above the supply pressure at the point of consideration which would
cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of flow and the
introduction of fluids, mixtures or substances from any source other than the
intended source.
   BACKSIPHONAGE. The flow of water or other liquids, mixture or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source
other than its intended source caused by a sudden reduction of pressure in the
potable water supply system.
   BORESIGHT or BORESIGHT TO DAYLIGHT. Providing adequate drainage for backflow
prevention assemblies installed in vaults through the use of an unobstructed
drain pipe.
   COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Property or location which is used
primarily for manufacture, production, storage, wholesaling or retailing of
products or services which are or may be placed in the flow of commerce or any
property or location which is used primarily for the provision of any service.
   COMMISSION. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ).
   CONTAMINANTS. Any foreign material, solid or liquid, not common to the
potable water supply which makes the water unfit or undesirable for human or
animal consumption.
   CONTAMINATION. The admission of contaminants into the potable water supply
system.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any connection, physical or otherwise, between a potable
water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment
or device, through which it is possible for any nonpotable, used, unclean,
polluted and contaminated water, or other substances, to enter into any part of
such potable water system under any condition or set of conditions.
   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE. Any nationally approved or recognized
device placed upon any connection, physical or otherwise, between a potable
water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment
or device, which is designed to prevent nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted and
contaminated water, or other substances, from entering into any part of such
potable water system under any condition or set of conditions.
   CUSTOMER SERVICE INSPECTION. An inspection designed to inspect and detect
any actual or potential cross-connection hazards and/or exceed of the lead
action level in solder or flux, pipe or pipe fittings.
   DEGREE OF HAZARD. The low or high hazard classification that shall be
attached to all actual or potential cross-connections.
      (1)   Health hazard. An actual or potential threat of contamination of a
physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the consumer's
potable water system that would be a danger to health.
      (2)   High hazard. The classification assigned to an actual or potential
cross-connection that potentially could allow a substance that may cause
illness or death to backflow into the potable water supply.
      (3)   Low hazard. The classification assigned to an actual or potential
cross-connections that potentially could allow a substance that may be
objectionable but not hazardous to one's health to backflow into the potable
water supply.
      (4)   Pollution hazard. An actual or potential threat to the physical
properties of the water system or the potability of the public or the
consumer's potable water system but which would not constitute a health or
system hazard, as defined. Maximum degree of intensity of pollution which the
potable water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a
nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system
or its appurtenances.
      (5)   System hazard. An actual or potential threat of severe danger to
the physical properties of the public or consumer's potable water supply or of
a pollution or contamination that would have a detrimental effect on the
quality of the potable water in the system.
   DIRECTOR. The Building Official or his designee who is vested with the
authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-
connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this
section.
   DOUBLE CHECK DETECTOR BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY or DOUBLE CHECK DETECTOR
ASSEMBLY or DCDA. An assembly composed of a line-size approved double check
assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved double
check valve assembly. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of
flow.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY or DOUBLE CHECK ASSEMBLY or
DOUBLE CHECK or DC. An assembly which consists of two independently acting,
approved check valves, including tightly closing resilient seated shutoff
valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located
resilient seated test cocks.
   FIRELINE TESTER. A tester who is employed by a state approved fireline
contractor and is certified by TNRCC to test backflow prevention assemblies on
firelines only. Tester must also be registered with the City of Cleburne
Inspection Department.
   GENERAL TESTER. A tester who is certified by TNRCC to test backflow
prevention assemblies on any domestic, commercial, industrial or irrigation
service except firelines. Tester must also be registered with the City of
Cleburne Inspection Department.
   MOBILE UNIT. Any operation which may have the potential to introduce
contaminants into a potable water system from a mobile source. These include,
but are not limited to, carpet-cleaning vehicles, water-hauling vehicles,
street-cleaning vehicles, liquid-waste vehicles, power-wash operations and
pest-control vehicles.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL USE. Water used by any person other than a residential
customer of the water supply and include all uses not specifically included in
"residential uses".
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, associations, corporations, firms,
clubs, trustees, receivers, and bodies political subdivision and corporate.
   POINT-OF-USE ISOLATION. The appropriate backflow prevention within the
consumer's water system at the point at which the actual or potential cross-
connection exists.
   POTABLE WATER SUPPLY. Any water supply intended or used for human
consumption or other domestic use.
   PREMISES. Any piece of property to which water is provided, including all
improvements, mobile structures, and structures located on it.
   PREMISES ISOLATION. The appropriate backflow prevention at the service
connection between the public water system and the water user.
   PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY or PRESSURE VACUUM
BREAKER or "PVB". An assembly which provides protection against backsiphonage,
but does not provide adequate protection against backpressure backflow. The
assembly is a combination of a single check valve with an AVB and can be used
with downstream resilient seated shutoff valves. In addition, the assembly has
suction and discharge gate valves and resilient seated test cocks which allow
the full testing of the assembly.
   PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM or SYSTEM. Any public or privately owned water system
which supplies water for public domestic use. The system will include all
services, reservoirs, facilities, and any equipment used in the process of
producing, treating, storing, or conveying water for public consumption.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY or REDUCED PRESSURE
PRINCIPLE ASSEMBLY or RP ASSEMBLY or RP. An assembly containing two
independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically
operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located
between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The
assembly shall include properly located resilient seated test cocks and a
tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valve at the end of the assembly.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE DETECTOR BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY or REDUCED
PRESSURE DETECTOR or RPDA. An assembly composed of a line-size approved reduced
pressure principle assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and
an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. The meter
shall register accurately for very low rates of flow.
   REGULATORY AUTHORITY. Any Municipal Officer or department of the city,
appointed by the City Manager to administer this section.
   REPRESENTATIVE OF THE WATER SYSTEM. A person designated by the city to
perform cross-connection control duties that shall include, but are not limited
to, cross-connection inspection and water use surveys.
   RESIDENTIAL USE. Water used by any residential customer of the water supply
and include single family dwellings, duplexes, multiplex, housing and
apartments where the individual units are each on a separate meter, or, in
cases where two or more units are served by one meter, the units are full-time
dwellings.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The point of delivery at which the water purveyor looses
control of the water.
   SPILL-RESISTANT PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER or SVB. An assembly containing an
independently operating, internally loaded check valve and independently
operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check
valve. This assembly is to be equipped with a properly located resilient seated
test cock and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each
end of the assembly.
   TCEQ. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
   THERMAL EXPANSION. The space needed for heated water to expand.
   USED WATER. Water supplied by a public water system to a water user's system
after it has passed through the service connection.
   (C)   Right of way encroachment. No person shall install or maintain a
backflow assembly upon or within any city right-of-way except as provided in
this section.
      (1)   A backflow prevention assembly required by the city may be
installed upon or within any city right-of-way only if the owner proves to the
city that there is no other feasible location for installing the assembly, and
installing it in the right-of-way will not interfere with traffic or utilities.
The city retains the right to approve the location, height, depth, enclosure,
and other requisites of the assembly prior to its installation.
      (2)   All permits and inspections required by the City Code to perform
work in the right-of-way shall be obtained.
      (3)   The assembly shall be installed below or flush with the surrounding
grade except when it is not practicable to install it in this manner. Any
assembly or portion of an assembly which extends aboveground shall be located
no closer than 18 inches to the face of the curb.
      (4)   The city shall not be liable for any damage done to or caused by an
assembly installed in a right-of-way.
      (5)   A property owner shall, at the request of the city and at the
owner's expense, relocate a backflow prevention assembly which encroaches upon
any city right-of-way when such relocation is necessary for street or utility
construction or repairs for purposes of public safety.
      (6)   A person commits an offense if he/she fails to relocate a backflow
prevention assembly located in or upon any city right-of-way after receiving a
written order from the regulatory authority to do so.
   (D)   Multiple connections. Any premises requiring multiple service
connections for adequacy of supply and/or fire protection will be required to
install a backflow assembly on each of the additional service lines to the
premises. The type of assembly will be determined by the degree of hazard that
could occur in the event of an interconnect between any of the buildings on the
premises.
   (E)   Protection required; installation.
      (1)   The backflow prevention assembly protection which is required under
this section shall be any of the duly nationally recognized and authorized
backflow prevention assemblies listed in a state approved Plumbing Code, or as
determined by the regulatory authority. Each backflow prevention assembly must
have been approved by the regulatory authority prior to installation. Failure
to obtain such approval prior to installation of the backflow prevention
assembly may result in the backflow prevention assembly failing to meet
approval by the regulatory authority. The regulatory authority shall approve
the type and location of backflow assembly to be installed within the area
served by the city. The assembly will be required in each of the following
circumstances, but the representative is in no way limited to the following
circumstances:
         (a)   The nature and extent of any activity of the premises, or the
materials used in connection with any activity of the premises, or material
stored on the premises, could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply.
         (b)   Premises having any one or more cross-connections identified or
are present.
         (c)   Premises having any one or more cross-connections and the cross-
connection(s) is protected by an atmospheric vacuum breaker device (AVB).
         (d)   Internal cross-connections are present that are not correctable.
         (e)   Intricate plumbing arrangements that are present which make it
impractical to ascertain whether cross-connections exist.
         (f)   There is a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or re-established.
         (g)   There is unduly restricted entry so that inspections for cross-
connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency to assure that cross-
connections do not exist.
         (h)   Materials are being used such that, if backflow should occur, a
health hazard could result.
         (i)   Installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is
deemed to be necessary to accomplish the purpose of these regulations in the
judgment of the city.
         (j)   An appropriate cross-connection survey report form has not been
filed with the Building Inspection Department of the city upon request of the
city.
         (k)   A fire sprinkler system that is connected to the city's water
system.
         (l)   All new construction if deemed necessary in the customer service
inspection. The type of assembly required will be commensurate with the degree
of hazards determined by the regulatory authority.
         (m)   When a building is constructed on commercial premises, and the
end use of such building is not determined or could change, a double check
backflow prevention assembly may be installed at the meter connection that
supplies water for public domestic use. If a different use, another device may
also be required.
         (n)   Any used water return system.
         (o)   In the event a point-of-use assembly has not had the testing or
repair done as required by this section, a premises isolation assembly will be
required.
         (p)   If it is determined that additions or alterations have been made
to the plumbing system without obtaining proper permits, premises isolation may
be required.
         (q)   All multi-story buildings or any building with a booster pump or
elevated storage tank.
         (r)   Retro-fitting will be required on all high hazard connections
and wherever else the city deems necessary to retrofit.
      (2)   All backflow prevention assemblies installed after the effective
date of this section shall be installed in a manner designed to facilitate ease
of inspection by the regulatory authority of the city or his chosen
representative. Any currently installed backflow prevention assemblies which
are located in inaccessible locations, or where the tester is subject to
physical danger, shall be relocated to approved locations following current
plumbing code or AWWA M14 Manual guideline standards.
      (3)   Anytime a backflow device is installed in a primary water supply
line of potable water, an expansion tank will be required on all water heaters
and/or boilers.
   (F)   Testing of assemblies.
      (1)   The regulatory authority shall inspect and require the installer/
property owner to test all backflow prevention assemblies in each of the
following circumstances:
         (a)   Immediately after installations;
         (b)   Whenever the assembly is moved;
         (c)   A minimum of once a year for all backflow devices on hazardous
locations.
         (d)   Premises that have been vacated and unoccupied for one year,
prior to re-occupancy;
         (e)   Immediately after repairs.
         (f)   All grandfathered, non-conforming devices will be removed and
replaced with approved equipment under the following:
            1.   Major repairs;
            2.   Modifications to the water system;
            3.   Report of failure of current backflow device.
      (2)   All assembly testing shall be performed by a TNRCC certified
backflow prevention assembly tester, approved by the regulatory authority.
      (3)   Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials
and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any
reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this section. Persons and
occupants of premises which are provided water service by the city, either
directly or indirectly, shall allow the city or their representatives ready
access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, testing, records, examination, or in the performance of any of
their duties. Where persons or occupants of premises have security measures in
force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into
their premises, the persons and occupants of the premises shall make necessary
arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable
identification, personnel from the city will be permitted to enter, without
delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
      (4)   The city is not liable for damage to a backflow prevention assembly
which may occur during testing.
      (5)   The regulatory authority may cause a water use survey to be
conducted at any establishment located in the city which is served by a public
water supply or which provides water to the public. Upon determination by the
regulatory authority that the establishment falls under the provisions of this
section and requires a backflow prevention assembly, the regulatory authority
shall issue a notice to abate the condition or order the establishment to
install the proper backflow prevention assembly.
      (6)   It is the responsibility of any person who owns or controls
property to have all assemblies tested in accordance with this section.
Assemblies may be required to be tested more frequently if the regulatory
authority deems necessary.
      (7)   All results from assembly testing by a certified backflow
prevention assembly tester shall be placed on a form that is purchased by the
tester from the city for an established fee.
   (G)   Thermal expansion. It is the responsibility of any person who owns or
controls property to eliminate the possibility of thermal expansion, if a
closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow assembly.
   (H)   Pressure loss. Any reduction in water pressure caused by the
installation of a backflow assembly is not the responsibility of the city.
   (I)   Residential service connections. Any person who owns or controls any
residential property which has been determined to have an actual or potential
cross-connection will be required to eliminate the actual or potential cross-
connection or have an approved backflow assembly installed in accordance with
this section.
   (J)   Rental properties. Any person who owns or controls property is
responsible for the installation, testing and repair of all backflow assemblies
on their property.
   (K)   Customer service inspection.
      (1)   Pursuant to TNRCC Water System Regulations, a customer service
inspection for cross-connection control shall be completed by the regulatory
authority prior to providing continuous water service in each of the following
circumstances:
         (a)   Water service to a newly constructed facility or previously
nonexisting premises;
         (b)   After any material improvement to building(s) or premises;
         (c)   Any correction or addition to the plumbing of any facility or
premises;
         (d)   The regulatory authority suspects a health hazard or potential
cross-connection exists.
      (2)   Permanent water service shall not be supplied to a new construction
facility(s) until after the customer service inspection is completed by the
Regulatory Authority or representative.
      (3)   Temporary water service which poses a potential cross-connection
threat to the potable water supply shall be protected by an approved backflow
prevention assembly.
   (L)   Installation guidelines and requirements for backflow prevention
assemblies.
      (1)   General. To insure proper operation and accessibility of all
backflow prevention assemblies, the following requirements shall apply to the
installation of these assemblies.
         (a)   Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance
with the current TNRCC Rule and these regulations. The assembly installer must
obtain the required plumbing permits and have the installation inspected by a
representative of the regulatory authority and tested by a General Tester or
Fire Tester.
         (b)   At those facilities where the regulatory authority requires a
backflow prevention assembly be installed at the point of delivery of the water
supply. Such installation of the assembly must be before any branch in the line
and on private property located just inside the boundary between the city right
of way and the landowner's property. The regulatory authority may specify other
areas for installation of the assembly. Assemblies that must be installed or
are located on city right of way are the responsibilities of the business or
entity that the water line is serving.
         (c)   The assembly must be protected from freezing and other severe
weather conditions.
         (d)   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be of a type and model
approved by the regulatory authority.
         (e)   All vertical installations of backflow assemblies must have
prior approval by the regulatory authority.
         (f)   Assemblies that are larger then 4 inches and installed more than
5 feet above floor level must have a suitable platform for use by testing or
maintenance personnel.
         (g)   Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipe fittings which could be used
for connecting a bypass line must not be installed.
         (h)   Premises where an uninterrupted water supply is critical should
be provided with two assemblies installed in parallel. They should be sized in
such a manner that either assembly will provide the maximum flow required.
         (i)   Lines should be thoroughly flushed prior to installation. A
strainer with blowout tapping may be required ahead of the assembly.
         (j)   All facilities that require continuous, uninterrupted water
service and are required to have a backflow assembly must make provisions for
the parallel installation of assemblies of the same type so that testing,
repair and maintenance can be performed.
         (k)   The property owner assumes all responsibility for any damages
resulting from installation, operation, and/or maintenance of a backflow
assembly. The owner shall be responsible for keeping all backflow prevention
assembly vaults reasonably free of silt and debris.
         (l)   Upon completion of installation, the regulatory authority shall
be notified and all assemblies must be inspected and tested. All assemblies
must be registered with the regulatory authority and shall provide the date of
installation, manufacturer, model, type, size, serial number or the backflow
assembly, and initial test report by a certified tester.
      (2)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies (RPs).
May be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be
hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. The RP is
normally used in locations where an air gap is impractical. The RP is effective
against both backsiphonage and backpressure.
         (a)   RPs must be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and
pressure for the premises being served. Flow characteristics are not standard.
Consult manufacturer's specifications for specific performance data.
         (b)   The assembly must be readily accessible for testing and
maintenance and must be located in an area where water damage to building or
furnishing would not occur from relief valve discharge. The property owner
assumes all responsibility for any damage caused by water discharge from an RP
assembly. An approved air gap shall be located at the relief valve orifice of
RP assemblies.
         (c)   No part of a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly shall be submerged in water or installed in a location subject to
flooding. RPs are typically installed above grade in well drained areas, but
may be installed below grade (ground level) if a boresight drain to daylight is
provided. The drain shall be of adequate capacity to carry the full rated flow
of the assembly and shall be screened on both ends.
         (d)   Enclosures shall be designed for ready access and sized to allow
for the minimum clearances established below. Removable protective enclosures
are typically installed on the smaller assemblies. Daylight drain ports must be
provided to accommodate full pressure discharge from the assembly.
         (e)   Assemblies 2 inches and smaller shall have at least 6 inch
clearance on both sides and on top of the assembly, and 12 inches below and
behind the assembly. All assemblies larger than 2 inches shall have a minimum
of 12 inches on the back side, 24 inches on the test cock side, and the relief
valve opening shall be at least 12 inches plus nominal size of assembly above
the floor or highest possible water level. Headroom of 6 feet 0 inches is
required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of
36 inches is required on all vault lids.
         (f)   All RP assemblies must be tested in accordance with this
section. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner must
notify the regulatory authority upon installation of any backflow prevention
assembly.
         (g)   Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-
by-case basis. Any deviations must have prior written approval of the
regulatory authority.
      (2)   Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assemblies
(RPDA). May be utilized in all installations requiring a reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention assembly and detector metering.
         (a)   RPDAs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable
for reduced pressure principle backflow assemblies (RP).
         (b)   The line-size RP assembly and the bypass RP assembly must each
be tested. A separate test report for each assembly must be completed by the
certified tester.
      (3)   Double check valve backflow prevention assemblies (DC). May be
utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be objectionable
but no hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system.
         (a)   DCs must be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and
pressure for premises being served. Consult manufacturer's specifications for
specific performance data.
         (b)   Premises where an uninterrupted water supply is critical should
be provided with two assemblies installed in parallel. Assemblies should be
sized in such a manner that either assembly will provide the minimum water
requirements while the two together will provide the maximum flow required.
         (c)   The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for
testing and maintenance. DCs may be installed below grade, providing all test
cocks are fitted with brass pipe plugs. All vaults shall be well drained,
constructed of suitable materials, and sized to allow for the minimum
clearances established below.
         (d)   Assemblies 2 inches and smaller shall have at least 6 inch
clearance below and on both sides of the assembly and, if located in a vault,
the bottom of the assembly shall be not more than 24 inches below grade. All
assemblies larger than 2 inches shall have a minimum clearance of 12 inches on
the back side, 24 inches on the test cock side, and 12 inches below the
assembly. Headroom of 6 feet 0 inches is required in vaults without a fully
removable top. A minimum access opening of 36 inches is required on all vault
lids. "Y" pattern double check valve assemblies shall be installed so that the
checks are horizontal and the test cocks face upward. These clearance standards
apply to all assemblies installed in vaults, enclosures, and meter boxes.
         (e)   Vertical installations of DCs are allowed only on sizes up to
and including 4 inches that meet the following requirements:
            1.   Internally spring-loaded check valves;
            2.   Flow is upward through assembly;
            3.   Manufacturer states their assembly can be used in a vertical
position; and
            4.   Approved by the regulatory authority.
         (f)   All DCs must be tested in accordance with this article. Tests
are the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner must notify the
regulatory authority upon installation of any backflow prevention assembly.
         (g)   Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-
by-case basis. Any deviations must have prior written approval of the
regulatory authority.
      (4)   Double check detector backflow prevention assemblies (DCDA). May be
utilized in all installations requiring a double check valve assembly and
detector metering.
         (a)   DCDAs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable
for double check valve assemblies (DCs).
         (b)   The line-size DC assembly and the bypass DC assembly must each
be tested. A separate test report for each assembly must be completed by the
certified tester.
      (5)   Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (PVB). May
be utilized at point-of-use protection only and where a substance is handled
that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the
potable water system. PVBs protect against backsiphonage only and shall not be
installed where there is a potential for backpressure.
         (a)   Assembly shall be installed a minimum of 12 inches above highest
downstream piping.
         (b)   PVBs shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or
where damage would occur from water discharge.
         (c)   The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and
maintenance, with a minimum clearance of 12 inches all around the assembly.
         (d)   All PVBs must be tested in compliance with this article. Tests
are the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner must notify the
regulatory authority of installation of any backflow prevention assembly.
         (e)   Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-
by-case basis. Any deviations must have prior written approval of the
regulatory authority.
      (6)   Spill resistant pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention
assemblies (SVB). May be utilized in all installations requiring a pressure
vacuum breaker.
         (a)   SVBs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable
for pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies.
   (M) Air gap separation. Air gaps provide maximum protection from backflow
hazards and should be utilized at all locations where "high" hazardous
substances are at risk of entering the potable water system.
      (1)   An air gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the
supply pipeline measured vertically above the top rim of the receiving vessel
and in no case less than one inch. If splashing is a problem, tubular screens
may be attached or the supply line may be cut at a 45° angle. The air gap
distance is measured from the bottom of the angle. Hoses are not allowed.
      (2)   Air gap separations shall not be altered in any way without prior
approval from the regulatory authority and must be available for inspection at
all reasonable times.
      (3)   Side walls, ribs or similar obstructions do not affect air gaps
when spaced from the inside edge of the spout opening a distance greater than
three times the diameter of the effective opening for a single, or a distance
greater than four times the effective opening for two intersecting walls.
   (N)   Fire suppression systems. All new installations of fire suppression
systems which utilize the city's potable water supply shall have installed an
approved backflow prevention device. An approved double check detector backflow
prevention assembly (DCDA) or reduced pressure detector assemblies (RPDA) shall
be the minimum protection for fire sprinkler systems using piping material that
is not approved for potable water use and/or that does not provide for periodic
flow-through during each 24 hour period, unless a variance has been issued in
writing from the regulatory authority. A RPDA must be installed if any solution
other than the potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler system.
      (1)   It is the responsibility of all property owners and persons in
charge of any premises to abide by the conditions of this section. In the event
of any changes to the plumbing system, it is the responsibility of the property
owners to notify the regulatory authority. All costs associated with this
section and the purchase, installation, testing and repair of a DCDA or RPDA
device is the responsibility of the property owner and persons in charge of any
premises.
      (2)   Upon the approved installation of the DCDA or RPDA device, a cross-
connection test report completed by a licensed fireline tester must be sent to
the attention of the regulatory authority or his representative and include the
information required by this section.
   (O)   Hydrant protection. An approved double check device backflow
prevention assembly (DCD) shall be the minimum protection for fire hydrant
water meters which are being used for a temporary water supply during any
construction or other uses which would pose a potential hazard to the public
water supply. An air gap must be provided, or an Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker
assembly must be installed if any solution other than the potable water can be
introduced into the water system.
      (1)   It is the responsibility of all persons engaging in the use and
rental of a fire hydrant water meter to abide by the conditions of this
section. All fire hydrant water meter rentals shall meet the current
requirements as provided for by the Utility Billing Department.
      (2)   Only city fire hydrant water meters with approved backflow
prevention assemblies are allowed to be used within the city limits.
      (3)   A refundable deposit is required to insure the return of all water
meter and backflow assemblies to the Utility Customer Service Division. Failure
to return the assemblies can result in the forfeiture of deposit and/or
enforcement action being taken against the responsible party, as allowed for in
the penalty section of this chapter.
      (4)   All non-approved fire hydrant meters which are found to be in use
in the city will be confiscated and enforcement action taken against the
responsible party, as allowed for in the enforcement subsection of this
section.
   (P)   Responsibilities.
      (1)   Property owner. It is the responsibility of all property owners
and/or persons in charge of any premises to abide by the conditions of this
section and to comply with the following:
         (a)   Payment of all costs associated with this section and the
purchase, installation, testing and repair of backflow prevention assemblies;
         (b)   To be installed and maintain all backflow prevention assemblies
in accordance with this article and acceptable industry practice;
         (c)   All premises, business, or dwellings classified as "hazardous"
shall cause to have all backflow prevention assemblies on their premises tested
annually. Such testing must be conducted by a certified cross-connection tester
who is registered with the city.
         (d)   Maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in proper working
order at all times, including repair as required;
         (e)   Maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in a manner which
allows them to be tested by a method that has been approved by the regulatory
authority; and
         (f)   All records related to backflow prevention assembly
installation, testing and repair shall be maintained on the premises for a
minimum of three years.
      (2)   Certified backflow prevention assembly tester. Shall comply with
the following requirements:
         (a)   Annually register with the regulatory authority;
         (b)   Maintain testing equipment in proper working condition/
calibration;
         (c)   Maintain the design or operation characteristics of an assembly;
         (d)   Ensure that devices are tested according to accepted industry
practice and TNRCC regulations;
         (e)   Enter required testing data, including test gauge serial
numbers, on cross-connection test forms obtained from the regulatory authority;
         (f)   Provide a copy of the completed test report to the regulatory
authority within 30 days of testing;
         (g)   Provide a copy of the completed test report to the property
owners and/or person in charge of premises;
         (h)   Maintain testing and/or repair records for a minimum of three
years.
      (3)   Regulatory authority. Shall comply with the following requirements:
         (a)   Authority to enter premises and install assembly(s) in cases of
noncompliance and add the costs to the water service charges;
         (b)   Authority to terminate the water service in case of
noncompliance;
         (c)   Shall inspect and cause to be tested all backflow prevention
assemblies installed pursuant to the requirements of this section;
         (d)   Cause to be tested annually all backflow devices on premises
that are classified as a health hazard location;
         (e)   Maintain all records related to backflow prevention assembly
installation, testing and repair for a minimum of three years;
         (f)   Maintain accurate list of all registered installers and testers;
         (g)   Ensure that all new facilities are not provided with permanent
water service until all backflow prevention assemblies have been tested and are
operational;
         (h)   Except in cases where the testing of backflow prevention
assemblies must be delayed until the installation of internal production or
auxiliary equipment, the regulatory authority shall not approve a certificate
of occupancy until all backflow prevention assemblies have been tested and are
operational;
         (i)   The city shall not be liable for damage caused to any backflow
prevention assembly as a result of the inspection or testing; and
         (j)   Maintain customer services inspection reports for 10 years.
   (Q)   Backflow prevention assembly tester certification registration
required. Only approved TCEQ licensed backflow prevention assembly testers can
test in the city. Testers must register annually with the regulatory authority,
provide proof of TCEQ certification, provide proof that testing equipment is
able to maintain a calibration of plus or minus 0.2 psid accuracy. Tester must
also submit copy of any underlying license (i.e. plumber, irrigator, water
operator, etc.).
   (R)   Compliance for lawn irrigation. All lawn irrigation systems must
comply with requirements as stated in §
150.047.
   (S)   Beverage dispensers. The water supply connection to carbonated
beverage dispensers shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure
zone backflow assembly conforming to ASSE 1013.
   (T)   Mobile units. The connection of a mobile unit to any potable water
system is prohibited unless such connection is protected by an air gap or an
approved backflow prevention assembly. Prior approval and annual device testing
of any backflow prevention assembly must be received from the regulatory
authority before connecting to any potable water system.
   (U)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Violations.
         (a)   A person commits an offense if he fails to maintain backflow
prevention assemblies in compliance with this section.
         (b)   A person commits an offense if he fails to comply with a repair
order issued by the regulatory authority.
         (c)   A person commits an offense if backflow from premises he owns,
operates or manages enters the public water supply system.
         (d)   A person commits an offense if he fails to pay any fees required
by this section.
         (e)   A person commits an offense if he violates any part of this
section.
         (f)   A person commits an offense if he reinstates water service to
premises discontinued or disconnected under this article, except as directed by
the regulatory authority.
         (g)   A person in charge of any facility commits an offense if he
allows an unregistered tester to perform testing work at their establishment.
         (h)   A person commits an offense if he tests backflow prevention
assembly within the city without being registered with the regulatory
authority.
         (i)   A person commits an offense if he tests backflow prevention
assembly within the city without being certified by the TNRCC.
         (j)   A person commits an offense if they fail to call for the
required inspections.
      (2)   Penalty.
         (a)   A person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable as set forth in §
10.99, for each act of violation and for each day or part of day during which
the violation is committed, continued or permitted.
         (b)   In addition to proceeding under the authority of subsection (B)
(1) of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and
civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other
ordinances against a person committing any violation of this section.
      (3)   Sanction for failure to pay inspection fees. In addition to
sanctions provided for by this section, the city is entitled to exercise
sanctions provided for by other ordinances of the city.
      (4)   A certified testers' registration may be reviewed and revoked by
the city if the regulatory authority determines that the tester:
         (a)   Has falsely, incompletely, or inaccurately reported assembly
reports;
         (b)   Has used inaccurate gauges;
         (c)   Has used improper testing procedures; or
         (d)   Has created a threat to public health or the environment.
(Ord. 9-1998-54, passed 9-8-98; Am. Ord. 11-2008-80, passed 11-25-08)
§ 150.045 PERMITS.
   (A)   No plumbing work shall be done prior to obtaining a plumbing permit
from the Building Inspections Department. Requests for permits may be made in
person or by calling (817) 645-0955. All plumbing work shall be done in
accordance with the rules and regulations as set forth in this chapter and the
contractor or master plumber shall comply in all respects with the provisions
of this subchapter.
   (B)   Payment shall be made of any and all fees that may become due and
owing by the contractor or master plumber. These fees may be billed to the
contractor and paid by the tenth of the following month, providing there is a
signed authorization in the Building Inspections Office listing all personnel
authorized to call for permits in the name of the company. A $25 late fee shall
be assessed to all accounts not current by the tenth of the following month.
Any account past due more than 60 days will lose all billing rights for six
months, and no permits shall be issued until the account is paid in full.
(Ord. 3-2002-16, passed 3-26-02)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.046 INSPECTION REQUESTS.
   (A)   Requests for inspections. All inspection requests must be called in at
least 24 hours prior to the inspection. Requests should be called in to the
Inspections Hotline at (817) 556-8810 and can be made 24 hours a day. Any
inspection properly called in before midnight shall be scheduled for the next
workday. Inspection requests must include the address, plumbing contractor,
permit number and type of inspection. Emergency inspections such as gas tests,
open sewer lines, etc., can be made the same day. Call (817) 645-0955 for
emergency inspections only.
   (B)   Failed/cancelled inspections. Inspections that fail, are not ready, or
are cancelled will be required to call in again to the inspection hotline.
Inspection cancellations must be called in to the hotline before 8:00 a.m. A
re-inspection fee will be charged for all failed inspections, or inspections
not ready by the third request.
(Ord. 3-2002-16, passed 3-26-02)
§ 150.047 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR INSTALLATION OF IRRIGATION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Definitions. The following words and terms, when used in this section,
have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
      AIR GAP. A complete physical separation between the free flowing
discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure
receiving vessel.
      ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER. An assembly containing an air inlet valve, a
check seat, and an air inlet port. The flow of water into the body causes the
air inlet valve to close the air inlet port. When the flow of water stops the
air inlet valve falls and forms a check against back-siphonage. At the same
time it opens the air inlet port allowing air to enter and satisfy the vacuum.
Also known as an ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER BACK-SIPHONAGE PREVENTION ASSEMBLY.
      BACKFLOW PREVENTION. The mechanical prevention of reverse flow, or back
siphonage, of non-potable water from an irrigation system into the potable
water source.
      BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY. Any assembly used to prevent backflow into
a potable water system. The type of assembly used is based on the existing or
potential degree of health hazard and backflow condition.
      COMPLETION OF IRRIGATION SYSTEM INSTALLATION. When the landscape
irrigation system has been installed, all minimum standards met, all tests
performed, and the irrigator is satisfied that the system is operating
correctly.
      CONSULTING. The act of providing advice, guidance, review or
recommendations related to landscape irrigation systems.
      CROSS-CONNECTION. An actual or potential connection between a potable
water source and an irrigation system that may contain contaminates or
pollutants or any source of water that has been treated to a lesser degree in
the treatment process.
      DESIGN. The act of determining the various elements of a landscape
irrigation system that will include, but not be limited to, elements such as
collecting site specific information, defining the scope of the project,
defining plant watering needs, selecting and laying out emission devices,
locating system components, conducting hydraulics calculations, identifying any
local regulatory requirements, or scheduling irrigation work at a site.
Completion of the various components will result in an irrigation plan.
      DESIGN PRESSURE. The pressure that is required for an emission device to
operate properly. Design pressure is calculated by adding the operating
pressure necessary at an emission device to the total of all pressure losses
accumulated from an emission device to the water source.
      DOUBLE CHECK VALVE. An assembly that is composed of two independently
acting, approved check valves, including tightly closed resilient seated
shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly
located resilient seated test cocks. Also known as a DOUBLE CHECK VALVE
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY.
      EMISSION DEVICE. Any device that is contained within an irrigation system
and that is used to apply water. Common emission devices in an irrigation
system include, but are not limited to, spray and rotary sprinkler heads, and
drip irrigation emitters.
      EMPLOYED. Engaged or hired to provide consulting services or perform any
activity relating to the sale, design, installation, maintenance, alteration,
repair, or service to irrigation systems. A person is employed if that person
is in an employer-employee relationship as defined by Internal Revenue Code, 26
United States Code Service, § 3212(d) based on the behavioral control,
financial control, and the type of relationship involved in performing
employment related tasks.
      HEAD-TO-HEAD SPACING. The spacing of spray or rotary heads equal to the
manufacturer's published radius of the head.
      HEALTH HAZARD. A cross-connection or potential cross-connection with an
irrigation system that involves any substance that may, if introduced into the
potable water supply, cause death or illness, spread disease, or have a high
probability of causing such effects.
      HYDRAULICS. The science of dynamic and static water; the mathematical
computation of determining pressure losses and pressure requirements of an
irrigation system.
      INSPECTOR. A licensed plumbing inspector, water district operator, other
governmental entity, or irrigation inspector who inspects irrigation systems
and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as
an employee or as a contractor.
      INSTALLER. A person who actually connects an irrigation system to a
private or public raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, who
is licensed according to Texas Administrative Code, Title 30, Chapter 30
(relating to occupational licenses and registrations).
      IRRIGATION INSPECTOR. A person who inspects irrigation systems and
performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an
employee or as a contractor and is required to be licensed under Texas
Administrative Code, Title 30, Chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses
and registrations).
      IRRIGATION PLAN. A scaled drawing of a landscape irrigation system which
lists required information, the scope of the project, and represents the
changes made in the installation of the irrigation system.
      IRRIGATION SERVICES. Selling, designing, installing, maintaining,
altering, repairing, servicing, permitting, providing consulting services
regarding, or connecting an irrigation system to a water supply.
      IRRIGATION SYSTEM. An assembly of component parts that is permanently
installed for the controlled distribution and conservation of water to irrigate
any type of landscape vegetation in any location, and/or to reduce dust or
control erosion. This term does not include a system that is used on or by an
agricultural operation as defined by Tex. Agricultural Code § 251.002.
      IRRIGATION TECHNICIAN. A person who works under the supervision of a
licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair, service or supervise
installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system
in or to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water
supply, and who is required to be licensed under Texas Administrative Code,
Title 30, Chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations).
      IRRIGATION ZONE. A subdivision of an irrigation system with a matched
precipitation rate based on plant material type (such as turf, shrubs, or
trees), microclimate factors (such as sun/shade ratio), topographic features
(such as slope) and soil conditions (such as sand, loam, clay, or combination)
or for hydrological control.
      IRRIGATOR. A person who sells, designs, offers consultations regarding,
installs, maintains, alters, repairs, services or supervises the installation
of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system to a private
or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is
required to be licensed under Texas Administrative Code, Title 30, Chapter 30.
      IRRIGATOR-IN-CHARGE. The irrigator responsible for all irrigation work
performed by an exempt business owner, including, but not limited to obtaining
permits, developing design plans, supervising the work of other irrigators or
irrigation technicians, and installing, selling, maintaining, altering,
repairing, or servicing a landscape irrigation system.
      LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION. The science of applying the necessary amount of
water to promote or sustain healthy growth of plant material or turf.
      LICENSE. An occupational license that is issued by the commission under
Texas Administrative Code, Title 30, Chapter 30 to an individual that
authorizes the individual to engage in an activity that is covered by Texas
Administrative Code, Title 30, Chapter 30.
      MAINLINE. A pipe within an irrigation system that delivers water from the
water source to the individual zone valves.
      MAINTENANCE CHECKLIST. A document made available to the irrigation
system's owner or owner's representative that contains information regarding
the operation and maintenance of the irrigation system, including, but not
limited to: checking and repairing the irrigation system, setting the automatic
controller, checking the rain or moisture sensor, cleaning filters, pruning
grass and plants away from irrigation emitters, using and operating the
irrigation system, the precipitation rates of each irrigation zone within the
system, any water conservation measures currently in effect from the water
purveyor, the name of the water purveyor, a suggested seasonal or monthly
watering schedule based on current evapotranspiration data for the geographic
region, and the minimum water requirements for the plant material in each zone
based on the soil type and plant material where the system is installed.
      MAJOR MAINTENANCE, ALTERATION, REPAIR, OR SERVICE. Any activity that
involves opening to the atmosphere the irrigation main line at any point prior
to the discharge side of any irrigation zone control valve. This includes, but
is not limited to, repairing or connecting into a main supply pipe, replacing a
zone control valve, or repairing a zone control valve in a manner that opens
the system to the atmosphere.
      MASTER VALVE. A remote control valve located after the backflow
prevention device that controls the flow of water to the irrigation system
mainline.
      MATCHED PRECIPITATION RATE. The condition in which all sprinkler heads
within an irrigation zone apply water at the same rate.
      NEW INSTALLATION. An irrigation system installed at a location where one
did not previously exist.
      NON-HEALTH HAZARD. A cross-connection or potential cross-connection from
a landscape irrigation system that involves any substance that generally would
not be a health hazard but would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically
objectionable if introduced into the potable water supply.
      NON-POTABLE WATER. Water that is not suitable for human consumption. Non-
potable water sources include, but are not limited to, irrigation systems,
lakes, ponds, streams, and gray water that is discharged from washing machines,
dishwashers or other appliances, water vapor condensate from cooling towers,
reclaimed water, and harvested rainwater.
      PASS-THROUGH CONTRACT. A written contract between a contractor or builder
and a licensed irrigator or exempt business owner to perform part or all of the
irrigation services relating to an irrigation system.
      POTABLE WATER. Water that is suitable for human consumption.
      PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER. An assembly containing an independently
operating internally loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded
air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. Also known as
a PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER BACK-SIPHONAGE PREVENTION ASSEMBLY.
      RECLAIMED WATER. Domestic or municipal wastewater which has been treated
to a quality suitable for beneficial use, such as landscape irrigation.
      RECORDS OF LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION ACTIVITIES. The irrigation plans,
contracts, warranty information, invoices, copies of permits, and other
documents that relate to the installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or
service of a landscape irrigation system.
      REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY. An assembly
containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a
hydraulically operating mechanically independent pressure differential relief
valve located between the two check valves and below the first check valve.
      STATIC WATER PRESSURE. The pressure of water when it is not moving.
      SUPERVISION. The on-the-job oversight and direction by a licensed
irrigator who is fulfilling his or her professional responsibility to the
client and/or employer in compliance with local or state requirements. Also a
licensed installer working under the direction of a licensed irrigator or
beginning January 1, 2009, an irrigation technician who is working under the
direction of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair or
service an irrigation system.
      WATER CONSERVATION. The design, installation, service, and operation of
an irrigation system in a manner that prevents the waste of water, promotes the
most efficient use of water, and applies the least amount of water that is
required to maintain healthy individual plant material or turf, reduce dust,
and control erosion.
      ZONE FLOW. A measurement, in gallons per minute or gallons per hour, of
the actual flow of water through a zone valve, calculated by individually
opening each zone valve and obtaining a valid reading after the pressure has
stabilized. For design purposes, the zone flow is the total flow of all nozzles
in the zone at a specific pressure.
      ZONE VALVE. An automatic valve that controls a single zone of a landscape
irrigation system.
   (B)   Valid license required.  
      (1)   Any person who connects an irrigation system to the water supply
within the city must hold a valid license, as defined by Texas Administrative
Code Title 30, Chapter 30 and required by Tex. Occupations Code Ch. 1903.
      (2)   Exception: A property owner is not required to be licensed in
accordance with Tex. Occupations Code, Title 12, § 1903.002(c)(1) if he or she
is performing irrigation work in a building or on a premises owned or occupied
by the person as the person's home. A home or property owner who installs an
irrigation system must meet the standards contained in Texas Administrative
Code, Title 30, Chapter 344 regarding spacing, water pressure, spraying water
over impervious materials, rain or moisture shut-off devices or other
technology, and isolation valves. If installation is performed by a homeowner,
the required backflow device must be tested by a licensed backflow prevention
tester.
   (C)   Permit required. Any person installing an irrigation system within the
territorial limits of the city is required to obtain a permit from the Building
Inspection Department. Any plan approved for a permit must be in compliance
with the requirements of this section. An irrigation permit must be obtained
prior to the beginning of any installation. The permit may be obtained upon
approval of the irrigation plan, the submittal of a permit application, and
payment of the permit fee as adopted by the current fee schedule of §
150.016.
   (D)   Backflow prevention methods and devices.
      (1)   Any irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply
must be connected through a backflow prevention method approved by the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). The backflow prevention device must
be approved by the American Society of Sanitary Engineers; or the Foundation
for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern
California; or the Uniform Plumbing Code; or any other laboratory that has
equivalent capabilities for both the laboratory and field evaluation of
backflow prevention assemblies. The backflow prevention device must be
installed in accordance with the laboratory approval standards or if the
approval does not include specific installation information, the manufacturer's
current published recommendations.
      (2)   Where there are no conditions that present a health hazard, double
check valve backflow prevention assemblies may be used to prevent backflow if
the device is tested upon installation and tested annually:
         (a)   Backpressure caused by an elevation of pressure in the discharge
piping by pump or elevation of piping above the supply pressure which could
cause a reversal of the normal flow of water or back-siphonage conditions
caused by a reduced or negative pressure in the irrigation system exist; and
         (b)   Test cocks are used for testing only.
      (3)   If a double check valve is installed below ground:
         (a)   Test cocks must be plugged, except when the double check valve
is being tested;
         (b)   Test cock plugs must be threaded, water-tight, and made of non-
ferrous material;
         (c)   A y-type strainer is installed on the inlet side of the double
check valve;
         (d)   There must be a clearance between any fill material and the
bottom of the double check valve to allow space for testing and repair; and
         (e)   There must be space on the side of the double check valve to
test and repair the double check valve.
      (4)   If conditions that present a health hazard exist, a reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies must be used if:
         (a)   The device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above ground
in a location that will ensure that the assembly will not be submerged; and
         (b)   Drainage is provided for any water that may be discharged
through the assembly relief valve.
      (5)   Backflow prevention devices used in applications designated as
health hazards must be tested upon installation and annually thereafter.
      (6)   If an irrigation system is connected to a potable water supply
through a double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, or reduced pressure
principle backflow assembly and includes an automatic master valve on the
system, the automatic master valve must be installed on the discharge side of
the backflow prevention assembly.
      (7)   The irrigator shall ensure the backflow prevention device is tested
prior to being placed in service and annually. All test results must be
provided to the city's Inspection Department and within ten business days of
testing of the backflow prevention device.
   (E)   Specific conditions and cross-connection control.
      (1)   Before any chemical is added to an irrigation system connected to
the potable water supply, the irrigation system must be connected through a
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.
      (2)   Connection of any additional water source to an irrigation system
that is connected to the potable water supply can only be done if the
irrigation system is connected to the potable water supply through a reduced-
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.
      (3)   Irrigation system components with chemical additives induced by
aspiration, injection, or emission system connected to any potable water supply
must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow device.
      (4)   If an irrigation system is designed or installed on a property that
is served by an on-site sewage facility, as defined in Texas Administrative
Code, Title 30, Chapter 285 then:
         (a)   All irrigation piping and valves must meet the separation
distances from the on-site sewage facilities system as required for a private
water line in Texas Administrative Code, Title 30, § 285.91(10);
         (b)   Any connections using a private or public potable water source
that is not the city's potable water system must be connected to the water
source through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly as
defined in Texas Administrative Code, Title 30, § 344.50; and
         (c)   Any water from the irrigation system that is applied to the
surface of the area utilized by the on-site sewage facility system must be
controlled on a separate irrigation zone or zones so as to allow complete
control of any irrigation to that area so that there will not be excess water
that would prevent the on-site sewage facilities system from operating
effectively.
   (F)   Water conservation. All irrigation systems shall be designed,
installed, maintained, altered, repaired, serviced, and operated in a manner
that will promote water conservation as defined in the definitions division of
this section.
   (G)   Irrigation plan design: minimum standards.
      (1)   An irrigator shall prepare an irrigation plan for each site where a
new irrigation system will be installed. A paper or electronic copy of the
irrigation plan must be on the job site at all times during the installation of
the irrigation system. A drawing showing the actual installation of the system
is due to each irrigation system owner after all new irrigation system
installations. During the installation of the irrigation system, variances from
the original plan may be authorized by the licensed irrigator if the variance
from the plan does not:
         (a)   Diminish the operational integrity of the irrigation system;
         (b)   Violate any requirements of this section; and
         (c)   Go unnoted in red on the irrigation plan.
      (2)   The irrigation plan must include complete coverage of the area to
be irrigated. If a system does not provide complete coverage of the area to be
irrigated, it must be noted on the irrigation plan.
      (3)   All irrigation plans used for construction must be drawn to scale.
The plan must include, at a minimum, the following information:
         (a)   The irrigator's seal, signature, and date of signing;
         (b)   All major physical features and the boundaries of the areas to
be watered;
         (c)   A north arrow;
         (d)   A legend;
         (e)   The zone flow measurement for each zone;
         (f)   Location and type of each:
            1.   Controller; and
            2.   Sensor (for example, but not limited to, rain, moisture, wind,
flow, or freeze);
         (g)   Location, type, and size of each:
            1.   Water source, such as, but not limited to a water meter and
point(s) of connection;
            2.   Backflow prevention device;
            3.   Water emission device, including, but not limited to, spray
heads, rotary sprinkler heads, quick-couplers, bubblers, drip, or micro-sprays;
            4.   Valve, including but not limited to, zone valves, master
valves, and isolation valves;
            5.   Pressure regulation component; and
            6.   Main line and lateral piping.
         (h)   The scale used; and
         (i)   The design pressure.
   (H)   Design and installation: minimum requirements.
      (1)   No irrigation design or installation shall require the use of any
component, including the water meter, in a way which exceeds the manufacturer's
published performance limitations for the component.
      (2)   Spacing.
         (a)   The maximum spacing between emission devices must not exceed the
manufacturer's published radius or spacing of the device(s). The radius or
spacing is determined by referring to the manufacturer's published
specifications for a specific emission device at a specific operating pressure.
         (b)   New irrigation systems shall not utilize above-ground spray
emission devices in landscapes that are less than 48 inches not including the
impervious surfaces in either length or width and which contain impervious
pedestrian or vehicular traffic surfaces along two or more perimeters. If pop-
up sprays or rotary sprinkler heads are used in a new irrigation system, the
sprinkler heads must direct flow away from any adjacent surface and shall not
be installed closer than four inches from a hardscape, such as, but not limited
to, a building foundation, fence, concrete, asphalt, pavers, or stones set with
mortar.
         (c)   Narrow paved walkways, jogging paths, golf cart paths or other
small areas located in cemeteries, parks, golf courses or other public areas
may be exempted from this requirement if the runoff drains into a landscaped
area.
      (3)   Water pressure. Emission devices must be installed to operate at
the minimum and not above the maximum sprinkler head pressure as published by
the manufacturer for the nozzle and head spacing that is used. Methods to
achieve the water pressure requirements include, but are not limited to, flow
control valves, a pressure regulator, or pressure compensating spray heads.
      (4)   Piping. Piping in irrigation systems must be designed and installed
so that the flow of water in the pipe will not exceed a velocity of five feet
per second for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe.
      (5)   Irrigation zones. Irrigation systems shall have separate zones
based on plant material type, microclimate factors, topographic features, soil
conditions, and hydrological requirements.
      (6)   Matched precipitation rate. Zones must be designed and installed so
that all of the emission devices in that zone irrigate at the same
precipitation rate.
      (7)   Irrigation systems shall not spray water over surfaces made of
concrete, asphalt, brick, wood, stones set with mortar, or any other impervious
material, such as, but not limited to, walls, fences, sidewalks, streets, etc.
      (8)   Master valve. When provided, a master valve shall be installed on
the discharge side of the backflow prevention device on all new installations.
      (9)   PVC pipe primer solvent. All new irrigation systems that are
installed using PVC pipe and fittings shall be primed with a colored primer
prior to applying the PVC cement in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code
(Section 316) or the International Plumbing Code (Section 605).
      (10)   Rain or moisture shut-off devices or other technology. All new
automatically controlled irrigation systems must include sensors or other
technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system
during periods of moisture or rainfall. Rain or moisture shut-off technology
must be installed according to the manufacturer's published recommendations.
Repairs to existing automatic irrigation systems that require replacement of an
existing controller must include a sensor or other technology designed to
inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system during periods of
moisture or rainfall.
      (11)   Isolation valve. All new irrigation systems must include an
isolation valve between the water meter and the backflow prevention device.
      (12)   Depth coverage of piping. Piping in all irrigation systems must be
installed according to the manufacturer's published specifications for depth
coverage of piping.
         (a)   If the manufacturer has not published specifications for depth
coverage of piping, the piping must be installed to provide minimum depth
coverage of six inches of select backfill, between the top of the pipe and the
natural grade of the topsoil. All portions of the irrigation system that fail
to meet this standard must be noted on the irrigation plan. If the area being
irrigated has rock at a depth of six inches or less, select backfill may be
mounded over the pipe. Mounding must be noted on the irrigation plan and
discussed with the irrigation system owner or owner's representative to address
any safety issues.
         (b)   If a utility, man-made structure or roots create an unavoidable
obstacle, which makes the six-inch depth coverage requirement impractical, the
piping shall be installed to provide a minimum of two inches of select backfill
between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil.
         (c)   All trenches and holes created during installation of an
irrigation system must be backfilled and compacted to the original grade.
      (13)   Wiring irrigation systems.
         (a)   Underground electrical wiring used to connect an automatic
controller to any electrical component of the irrigation system must be listed
by Underwriters Laboratories as acceptable for burial underground.
         (b)   Electrical wiring that connects any electrical components of an
irrigation system must be sized according to the manufacturer's recommendation.
         (c)   Electrical wire splices which may be exposed to moisture must be
waterproof as certified by the wire splice manufacturer.
         (d)   Underground electrical wiring that connects an automatic
controller to any electrical component of the irrigation system must be buried
with a minimum of six inches of select backfill.
      (14)   Water contained within the piping of an irrigation system is
deemed to be non-potable. No drinking or domestic water usage, such as, but not
limited to, filling swimming pools or decorative fountains, shall be connected
to an irrigation system. If a hose bib (an outdoor water faucet that has hose
threads on the spout) is connected to an irrigation system for the purpose of
providing supplemental water to an area, the hose bib must be installed using a
quick coupler key on a quick coupler installed in a covered purple valve box
and the hose bib and any hoses connected to the bib must be labeled "non
potable, not safe for drinking." An isolation valve must be installed upstream
of a quick coupler connecting a hose bib to an irrigation system.
      (15)   Beginning January 1, 2010, either a licensed irrigator or a
licensed irrigation technician shall be on-site at all times while the
landscape irrigation system is being installed. When an irrigator is not
onsite, the irrigator shall be responsible for ensuring that a licensed
irrigation technician is on-site to supervise the installation of the
irrigation system.
   (I)   Completion of irrigation system installation. Upon completion of the
irrigation system, the irrigator or irrigation technician who provided
supervision for the on-site installation shall be required to complete four
items:
      (1)   A final "walk through" with the irrigation system's owner or the
owner's representative to explain the operation of the system;
      (2)   The maintenance checklist on which the irrigator or irrigation
technician shall obtain the signature of the irrigation system's owner or
owner's representative and shall sign, date, and seal the checklist. If the
irrigation system's owner or owner's representative is unwilling or unable to
sign the maintenance checklist, the irrigator shall note the time and date of
the refusal on the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative's
signature line. The irrigation system owner or owner's representative will be
given the original maintenance checklist and a duplicate copy of the
maintenance checklist shall be maintained by the irrigator. The items on the
maintenance checklist shall include but are not limited to:
         (a)   The manufacturer's manual for the automatic controller, if the
system is automatic;
         (b)   A seasonal (spring, summer, fall, winter) watering schedule
based on either current/real time evapotranspiration or monthly historical
reference evapotranspiration (historical ET) data, monthly effective rainfall
estimates, plant landscape coefficient factors, and site factors;
         (c)   A list of components, such as the nozzle, or pump filters, and
other such components, that require maintenance and the recommended frequency
for the service; and
         (d)   The statement, "This irrigation system has been installed in
accordance with all applicable state and local laws, ordinances, rules,
regulations or orders. I have tested the system and determined that it has been
installed according to the Irrigation Plan and is properly adjusted for the
most efficient application of water at this time."
      (3)   A permanent sticker which contains the irrigator's name, license
number, company name, telephone number and the dates of the warranty period
shall be affixed to each automatic controller installed by the irrigator or
irrigation technician. If the irrigation system is manual, the sticker shall be
affixed to the original maintenance checklist. The information contained on the
sticker must be printed with waterproof ink and include: irrigator's name,
license number, company name, telephone number and the dates of the warranty
period.
      (4)   The irrigation plan indicating the actual installation of the
system must be provided to the irrigation system's owner or owner
representative.
   (J)   Maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of irrigation systems.
      (1)   The irrigator is responsible for all work that the irrigator
performed during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an
irrigation system during the warranty period. The irrigator or business owner
is not responsible for the professional negligence of any other irrigator who
subsequently conducts any irrigation service on the same irrigation system.
      (2)   All trenches and holes created during the maintenance, alteration,
repair, or service of an irrigation system must be returned to the original
grade with compacted select backfill.
      (3)   Colored PVC pipe primer solvent must be used on all pipes and
fittings used in the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an
irrigation system in accordance with the International Plumbing Code (Section
605).
      (4)   When maintenance, alteration, repair or service of an irrigation
system involves excavation work at the water meter or backflow prevention
device, an isolation valve shall be installed, if an isolation valve is not
present.
   (K)   Reclaimed water. Reclaimed water may be utilized in landscape
irrigation systems if:
      (1)   There is no direct contact with edible crops, unless the crop is
pasteurized before consumption;
      (2)   The irrigation system does not spray water across property lines
that do not belong to the irrigation system's owner;
      (3)   The irrigation system is installed using purple components;
      (4)   The domestic potable water line is connected using a reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device, in accordance with § 290.47(i)
of this title (relating to Appendices);
      (5)   A minimum of an eight inch by eight inch sign, in English and
Spanish, is prominently posted on/in the area that is being irrigated, that
reads, "RECLAIMED WATER - DO NOT DRINK" and "AGUA DE RECUPERACIÓN - NO BEBER";
and
      (6)   Backflow prevention on the reclaimed water supply line shall be in
accordance with the regulations of the city's water provider.
   (L)   Advertisement requirements.
      (1)   All vehicles used in the performance of irrigation installation,
maintenance, alteration, repair, or service must display the irrigator's
license number in the form of "LI_______" in a contrasting color of block
letters at least two inches high, on both sides of the vehicle.
      (2)   All forms of written and electronic advertisements for irrigation
services must display the irrigator's license number in the form of "LI_____."
Any form of advertisement, including business cards and estimates which
displays an entity's or individual's name other than that of the licensed
irrigator must also display the name of the licensed irrigator and the licensed
irrigator's license number. Trailers that advertise irrigation services must
display the irrigator's license number.
      (3)   The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the commission
must be prominently displayed on a legible sign and displayed in plain view of
the purpose of addressing complaints at the permanent structure where
irrigation business is primarily conducted and irrigation records are kept.
   (M) Contracts.
      (1)   All contracts to install an irrigation system must be in writing
and signed by each party and must specify the irrigator's name, license number,
business address, current business telephone numbers, the date that each party
signed the agreement, the total agreed price, and must contain the statement,
"Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, PO Box 13087, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's website
is: www.tceq.state.tx.us." All contracts must include the irrigator's seal,
signature, and date.
      (2)   All written estimates, proposals, bids, and invoices relating to
the installation or repair of an irrigation system(s) must include the
irrigator's names, license number, business address, current business telephone
number(s), and the statement: "Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, PO Box 13087, Austin, Texas
78711-3087. TCEQ's website is: www.tceq.state.tx.us."
      (3)   An individual who agrees by contract to provide irrigation services
as defined in Texas Administrative Code, Title 30, § 344.30 (relating to
license required) shall hold an irrigator license issued under Texas
Administrative Code, Title 30, § 344.1(36) (relating to definitions). If a
pass-through contract includes irrigation services, then the irrigation portion
of the contract can only be performed by a licensed irrigator. If an irrigator
installs a system pursuant to a pass-through contract, the irrigator shall
still be responsible for providing the irrigation system's owner or owner's
representative a copy of the warranty and all other documents required under
this section. A pass-through contract must identify by name and license number
the irrigator that will perform the work and must provide a mechanism for
contracting the irrigator for irrigation system warranty work.
      (4)   The contract must include the dates that the warranty is valid.
      (5)   Warranties for systems:
         (a)   On all installations of new irrigation systems, an irrigator
shall present the irrigation system's owner or owner's representatives with a
written warranty covering materials and labor furnished in the new installation
of the irrigator system. The irrigator shall be responsible for adhering to
terms of warranty. If the irrigator's warranty is less than the manufacturer's
warranty for the system components, then the irrigator shall provide the
irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative with applicable
information regarding the manufacturer's warranty period. The warranty must
include the irrigator's seal, signature, and date. If the warranty is part of
an irrigator's contract, a separate warranty document is not required.
         (b)   An irrigator's written warranty on new irrigation systems must
specify the irrigator's name, business address, and business telephone numbers,
must contain the signature of the irrigation system's owner or owner's
representative confirming receipt of the warranty and must include the
statement; "Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, PO Box 130897, Austin, Texas 78711-3087.
TCEQ's website is: www.tceq.state.tx.us."
         (c)   On all maintenance, alterations, repairs, or service to existing
irrigation systems, an irrigator shall present the irrigation system's owner or
owner's representative a written document that identifies the materials
furnished in the maintenance, alternation, repair, or service. If a warranty is
provided, the irrigator shall abide by the terms. The warranty document must
include the irrigator's name and business contact information.
   (N)   Duties and responsibilities of city irrigation inspectors. A licensed
irrigation inspector shall enforce the ordinance of the city, and shall be
responsible for:
      (1)   Verifying that the appropriate permits have been obtained for an
irrigation system and that the irrigator and installer or irrigation
technician, if applicable, are licensed;
      (2)   Inspecting the irrigation system;
      (3)   Determining that the irrigation system complies with the
requirements of this section;
      (4)   Determining that the appropriate backflow prevention device was
installed, tested, and test results provided to the city;
      (5)   Investigating complaints related to irrigation system installation,
maintenance, alteration, repairs, or service of an irrigation system and
advertisement of irrigation services; and
      (6)   Maintaining records according to this section.
   (O)   Items not covered by this section. Any item not covered by this
section and required by law shall be governed by the Texas Occupations Code,
the Texas Water Code, Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, and any other
applicable state statute or TCEQ rule.
   (P)   Fees. The City Council may create a schedule of fees for obtaining and
renewing an irrigation permit. These fees will be in amounts sufficient to
cover the city's costs in issuing and renewing the permits, including, but not
limited to, staff time and other overhead costs. All permit fees will be based
up the currently adopted fee schedule in §
150.016.
   (Q)   Enforcement.
      (1)   The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the
provisions of this section as may be required by governing law. Any person,
firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this code, or fails
to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, is subject to
suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any
violation of this section is declared to be a nuisance.
      (2)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding $2,000. Each day that a provision of
this section is violated shall constitute a separate offense. An offense under
this section is a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $2,000.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as a waiver of the
city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this section
and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to the
following:
         (a)   Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates this
section or to require specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with
this section; and
         (b)   Other available relief.
(Ord. 11-2008-79, passed 11-25-08)
§ 150.048 [RESERVED].
§ 150.049 [RESERVED].
INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
§ 150.050 ADOPTED.
   The city hereby adopts the 2021 edition of the International Swimming Pool
and Spa Code. Copies of the code and the amendments thereto, as referenced in
this section, are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent
record and inspection. In addition thereto, the city hereby adopts the
recommended amendments to the 2021 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code
prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, which are attached
to Ordinance OR10-2022-75 as "Exhibit A - Section 150.050". The exhibit is not
set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of
the City Secretary. The chief building official, or his authorized
representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as adopted herein and as amended.
(Ord. 10-2022-75, passed 10-25-22)
ELECTRICAL CODE
§ 150.055 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Cleburne Electrical
Code.”
('68 Code, § 11-1)
§ 150.056 ELECTRICAL BOARD — CREATED; POWERS AND DUTIES; APPEALS.
   (A)   Membership. There is created an Electrical Board, composed of the
Building Official and five resident's of the city. The latter membership shall
consist of two master electricians, one journeyman electrician, and two persons
who are known to have an interest in community affairs. The Building Official
shall serve as an ex officio member without voting privileges and as the
Secretary of the Board.
   (B)   Term of office; compensation. The City Council shall originally
appoint the five members, who shall draw for one and two-year first terms of
office. Thereafter the term of office of each such member shall be for a period
of two years or until his successor shall have been appointed. The City Council
may remove any member, and its decision thereon shall be final. Members shall
not serve for more than two consecutive terms and shall serve without
compensation.
   (C)   Quorum. Three members of the Electrical Board present at any meeting
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business or the carrying out
of any duties. All decisions and recommendations of the Board shall require a
concurring vote of at least three members.
   (D)   Disqualification of journeyman member. Employment of the journeyman
electrician member of the board by either master electrician of the Board for
as long as two consecutive months shall automatically disqualify the journeyman
electrician from further membership on the Board, and a successor shall be
appointed forthwith to serve the remainder of the term of such disqualified
member.
   (E)   Absences from meetings. The absence of any Board member from the
regularly scheduled meeting of the Board for three consecutive meetings shall
automatically disqualify such member from further membership on the Board, and
a successor shall be appointed forthwith to serve the remainder of the term of
such disqualified member.
   (F)   Records of proceedings to be kept and filed. The Electrical Board
shall keep records of its proceedings and decisions and file copies of these
records with the office of the City Secretary and the Building Official.
   (G)   Rules governing meetings. The Electrical Board shall have the power to
make and promulgate its own rules governing its meetings and proceedings,
including selection of a Chairperson.
('68 Code, § 11-1.2)
   (H)   Powers and duties. The Electrical Board has the following powers and
duties:
      (1)   Hear appeals from decisions of the Building Official or Electrical
Inspector and reverse, affirm or modify the decision appealed from, or make
such order or determination as in its opinion ought to be made.
      (2)   Interpret applicable provisions of this code; and
      (3)   Hear and make recommendations to the City Council concerning
requests for amendments to this code.
('68 Code, § 11-1.3)
   (I)   Appeal procedure.
      (1)   The Electrical Board shall hear the appeals of persons aggrieved by
orders or decisions made by the Electrical Inspector to the Building Official
and shall render a decision on each appeal.
      (2)   The appeal shall be filed in writing with the City Secretary within
five days from the date of the decision or orders appealed from. Such appeal
shall be in duplicate, shall refer to the specific decision or order appealed
from and shall clearly state the appellant's grounds for appeal. The City
Secretary shall notify the Chairperson of the Electrical Board of all appeals
filed. Such appeals shall be placed on the agenda of the Electrical Board for
hearing. The Board shall notify all necessary parties of the date and location
of the hearing. Parties may appear before the Electrical Board in person, by
agent or by attorney. Appeals shall be heard at reasonable times at the
convenience of the Board but not later than 30 days after receipt thereof. The
appellant shall cause to be made at his or her own expense any tests or
research required by the Board to substantiate his or her claims.
      (3)   The appellant shall be required to pay a fee of $25 per appeal.
      (4)   The Building Official and Electrical Inspector shall transmit to
the Electrical Board all records and dates in their possession which are
relevant to the appeal.
      (5)   All orders or decisions made by the Building Official or Electrical
Inspector shall remain in full effect until such time as the Board revokes such
order or decision or until such time as the City Council amends the provisions
of this code.
      (6)   The Building Official shall enforce and execute all legal decisions
and orders of the Electrical Board.
      (7)   Any person who may feel himself or herself aggrieved by any action
or decision of the Board may, within 30 days after receiving notice of the
Board's final order, file suit in a district court of the county, to correct
any error of law in such decision. Such suit shall be filed against the Board
as defendant, and service of process may be made upon the Board by serving the
City Secretary.
('68 Code, § 11-1.4) (Ord. 8-1979-43, passed 8-14-79) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.057 NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   The city hereby adopts the 2020 edition of the National Electrical Code.
Copies of the code and the amendments thereto, as referenced in this section,
are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent record and
inspection. In addition thereto, the city hereby adopts the recommended
amendments to the 2020 National Electrical Code prepared by the North Central
Texas Council of Governments, which are attached to Ordinance OR10-2022-75 as
"Exhibit A - Section 150.057". The exhibit is not set out herein, but is on
file and available for inspection in the office of the City Secretary. The
chief building official, or his authorized representative, is hereby authorized
and directed to enforce all provisions of the National Electrical Code, as
adopted herein and as amended.
('68 Code, § 11-2) (Ord. 5-1976-19, passed 5-11-76; Am. Ord. 6-1987-32, passed
6-9-87; Am. Ord. 6-1990-11, passed 6-12-90; Am. Ord. 6-1993-20, passed 6-24-93;
Am. Ord. 12-1996-89, passed 12-10-96; Am. Ord. 4-2000-28, passed 4-11-00; Am.
Ord. 3-2002-17, passed 3-26- 02; Am. Ord. 05-2004-25, passed 5-11-04; Am. Ord.
10-2011-58, passed 10-25-11; Am. Ord. 09-2017-61, passed 9-26-17; Am. Ord. 10-
2022-75, passed 10-25-22) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.058 ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE, REGISTRATION, AND PERMIT/INSPECTION
REQUIREMENTS.
   Any electrical contractor, sign electrician or master electrician licensed
under this subchapter, before engaging in the business of installing wiring,
electrical apparatus or signs, shall register with the Building Inspections
Department; file with the Building Inspections Department a copy of his or her
current state license and a copy of a certificate of general liability
insurance in the amounts stated in § 150.59; and shall abide by the following
conditions:
   (A)   All electrical work installed or electrical signs erected or installed
will be done in accordance with the rules and regulations as set forth in this
subchapter and that such contractor, sign electrician or master electrician
will comply in respects with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Payment will be made of any and all fees that may become due and owing
by such contractor, sign electrician or master electrician.
   (C)   The contractor, sign electrician or master electrician shall indemnify
and protect any person with whom he or she shall contract to work, and shall
indemnify and protect the city against such person or against the city in
consequence of the operation covered by any certificate issued by the
Electrical Inspector.
   (D)   The contractor, sign electrician or master electrician shall pay all
damages for personal injuries to anyone on account of any excavation made in,
or any obstruction placed upon, any street or sidewalk in the city by anyone
while engaged in and about the performance of such work.
   (E)   The contractor, sign electrician or master electrician shall pay all
damages for injury in encroachment upon the property of abutting lot owners or
other persons in constructing the improvements or doing the work.
   (F)   The contractor, sign electrician or master electrician will defend all
suits and hold the city harmless against any and all loss or damage on account
of either personal injury or injuries to property.
('68 Code, § 11-3) (Ord. passed 12-13-51; Am. Ord. 11-1990-29, passed 11-13-90;
Am. Ord. 12-1996-89, passed 12-10-96; Am. Ord. 3-2002-17, passed 3-26-02)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.059 COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   An electrical contractor, sign electrician or master electrician licensed
under this subchapter, before engaging in the business of installing wiring,
electrical apparatus or signs, shall file with the Building Inspections
Department evidence of commercial general liability insurance which meets or
exceeds the following requirements:
   (A)   Commercial general liability insurance in an amount not less than
$100,000 combined for property damage and bodily injury sustained by one or
more persons, $100,000 aggregate for products and completed operations. In the
event claims occur which reduce the required coverage to a level of $75,000 or
less, the licensee shall reinstate the coverage to the original $100,000 amount
or greater.
   (B)   The products and completed operations liability shall cover the public
and the contractor from claims arising from an occurrence after the job is
completed.
   (C)   A license applicant or holder shall furnish to the city a certificate
of insurance as evidence of the insurance required in divisions (A) or (B) of
this section. The license holder's name and address must be shown as it appears
on the license. Binders and interim certificates of less than 60 days will not
be accepted.
   (D)   The certificate of insurance shall certify that the policy has been
endorsed with the provisions that in the event such coverage is canceled or
reduced, the insurance carrier shall notify the Department at least 45 days
prior to such cancellation or reduction in coverage. Each nonrenewal notice
shall also be submitted by the insurance carrier to the city at least 45 days
prior to the renewal date. In the event that coverage is canceled for
nonpayment of premium, the insurance carrier shall notify the department at
least ten days prior to such cancellation.
   (E)   Certificates of insurance will be accepted only when signed by those
officers or agents of an insurance company empowered to sign such certificates
by the insurance company. The insured will obtain the names of such officers or
agents from the insurance companies and will provide a list of such officers
and agents with the other submissions required in this section.
('68 Code, § 11-3.1) (Ord. 5-1992-11, passed 5-28-92; Am. Ord. 3-2002-17,
passed 3-26-02)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.060 INFORMATION TO BE FURNISHED BY CONTRACTORS AND ELECTRICIANS.
   Each holder of a license of any grade issued under this subchapter shall
furnish the Electrical Inspector with a written notice of his permanent
address, and each holder of an electrical contractor's license, a master
electrician's license or a sign electrician's license shall furnish the
Electrical Inspector with a written notice of the address and telephone number
of his regularly established place of business.
('68 Code, § 11-4) (Ord. passed 12-13-51)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.061 WORK BY HOMEOWNERS.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall prohibit any bona fide homeowner
from personally installing electrical conductors or equipment within his own
home, provided that the owner shall file with the Electrical Inspector approved
plans and specifications, satisfy the Electrical Inspector as to his ability to
install electrical wiring, apply for and secure a permit, pay required fees, do
the work in accordance with this subchapter, apply for an inspection and
receive a certificate of approval. Personal installation by an owner under
these homeowner rights shall be by himself, for himself, on his own homestead
premises, without compensation, and no person shall be employed to assist him
in any way on such work.
('68 Code, § 11-5) (Ord. passed 12-13-51)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.062 - 150.069 [RESERVED.]
§ 150.070 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES — RESPONSIBILITY.
   This subchapter shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating or installing any electrical
wires, appliances, apparatus, construction or equipment for damages to any
person injured by any defects therein; nor shall the city or any agent thereof
be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized
herein or the certificate of inspection issued by the Electrical Inspector.
('68 Code, § 11-15) (Ord. passed 12-13-51)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.071 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.
   (A)   Office created. There is created the office of Electrical Inspector.
('68 Code, § 11-26)
   (B)   Appointment. The Electrical Inspector shall be appointed by the
Director of Public Works.
('68 Code, § 11-27)
   (C)   Qualifications. The person chosen to fill the office of Electrical
Inspector shall be of good moral character, shall be possessed of such
executive ability as is requisite for the performance of his duties and shall
have a thorough knowledge of the standard materials and methods used in the
installation of electrical equipment. He shall be well versed in approved
methods of construction for safety to persons and property, the statutes of the
state relating to electrical work and any orders, rules and regulations issued
by authority thereof, and the National Electrical Code, as approved by the
National Fire Protection Association. He shall have had at least five years
experience as an Electrical Inspector or in the installation of electrical
equipment, or, in lieu of such experience, he shall be a graduate in electrical
engineering or physics of a college or university considered by the Mayor and
City Council as having suitable requirements for graduation, and he shall have
had two years practical electrical experience.
('68 Code, § 11-28) (Ord. passed 12-13-51; Am. Ord. 6-1993-20, passed 6-24-93)
§ 150.072 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   It shall be unlawful for the Electrical Inspector or any of his assistants
to engage in the business of the sale, installation, or maintenance of
electrical equipment, either directly or indirectly, and they shall have no
financial interest in any concern engaged in such business in the city at any
time while holding such office
('68 Code, § 11-29) (Ord. passed 12-13-51)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.073 DUTIES OF INSPECTOR.
   (A)   General duties. It shall be the duty of the Electrical Inspector to
see that all wires, poles, machinery and electrical apparatus of every kind,
character and description owned by any person in the city are constructed,
erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this code and any
other applicable ordinance of the city relating to such matter, and he shall do
and perform such other duties as may be required by the City Council.
('68 Code, § 11-30)
   (B)   Duty to supervise the placing, stringing or attaching of utility and
other wires. The Electrical Inspector is authorized, empowered,and directed to
have general supervision over the placing, stringing or attaching of telegraph,
telephone, electric light or other wires so as to prevent fire and accident or
injury to persons or property and to cause all such wires and electric lights
to be so placed, constructed and guarded as not to cause fire or accident or to
endanger life or property. All much lights, wires or electrical apparatus as
now exist or which may hereafter be constructed or placed shall be subject lo
such supervision.
('68 Code, § 11-31) (Ord. passed 12-13-51)
§ 150.074 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Requests for inspections. All inspection requests must be called in at
least 24 hours prior to the inspection. Requests should be called in to the
Inspections Hotline at (817) 556-8810 and can be made 24 hours a day. Any
inspection properly called in before midnight shall be scheduled for the next
workday. Inspection requests must include the address, electrical contractor,
permit number and type of inspection. Emergency inspections such as gas tests,
open sewer lines, etc., can be made the same day. Call (817) 645-0955 for
emergency inspections only.
   (B)   Failed/cancelled inspections. Inspections that fail, are not ready, or
are cancelled shall be required to call in again to the inspection hotline.
Inspection cancellations must be called in to the hotline before 8:00 a.m. A
re-inspection fee shall be charged for all failed inspections, or inspections
not ready by the third request.
(Ord. passed 12-13-51; Am. Ord. passed 2-14-52; Am. Ord. 12-1996-89, passed 12-
10-96; Am. Ord. 3-2002-17, passed 3-26-02)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.075 ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR'S AND ELECTRICIAN'S LICENSES.
   (A)   Required; grades; permanent identification number for master
electricians.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not the holder of an
unexpired, unrevoked license to do any business or perform any work in
connection with constructing, installing, maintaining, extending, repairing or
replacing any electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment of any voltage for
light, power, decoration, amusement or any other purposes, except as otherwise
permitted in this subchapter, within the city limits.
      (2)   All persons engaged in the work of installing electrical apparatus,
fixtures or appliances, or offering or professing to do such work for pay,
before engaging in such business or work within the corporate limits of the
city, shall obtain, take out and procure a license of the grades as follows,
depending upon the nature of the electrical work to be done:
         (a)   Master electrician's license. A master electrician's license
shall entitle the holder to contract for, and engage in the business of,
electrical wiring of any nature, and to employ and supervise journeymen
electricians. Each master electrician operating a separate business will be
issued a permanent identification number from the city's Electrical Inspector.
This identification number shall be permanently affixed to each side of every
vehicle operating in connection with the business in letters and numbers not
less than 2½ inches in height.
         (b)   Journeyman electrician's license. A journeyman electrician's
license shall entitle the holder thereof to perform any type of electrical work
under the supervision of a master electrician, but in no case shall a
journeyman electrician contract for, or engage in the business of electrical
work of any nature, nor perform electrical work of any nature except under the
supervision of a master electrician.
         (c)   Master sign electrician's license. A master sign electrician's
license shall entitle the holder to contract for, and engage in the business
of, manufacturing and installing luminous gas or electric discharge signs and
outline lighting, and to employ and supervise journeymen electricians in the
performance of such sign work. In no case shall sign electricians perform or
supervise the performance of any electrical work whatsoever, except as so
outlined.
         (d)   Journeyman sign electrician's license. A journeyman sign
electrician's license shall entitle the holder thereof to perform any type of
electrical work under the supervision of a master sign electrician and sign
work as outlined above under the supervision of a master sign electrician, but
in no case shall a journeyman sign electrician contract for, or engage in the
business of electrical work of any nature, nor perform electrical work of any
nature except under the supervision of either a master or master sign
electrician.
         (e)   Maintenance electrician's license. A maintenance electrician's
license shall entitle the holder to maintain and repair electrical lines and
equipment of the firm or corporation employing such maintenance electrician, on
its own or leased premises, and only when his or her employment makes this
responsibility a part of his or her duty.
         (f)   Residential electrician's license. A residential electrician's
license shall entitle the holder to perform any type of electrical work on
those type structures included in occupancy groups SF - D - T as classified by
the Uniform Building Code; provided that all such work shall be done under the
supervision of a master electrician who is either the residential specialist's
employer or a fellow employee.
('68 Code, § 11-46)
         (g)   To obtain an electrical license. A City of Cleburne electrical
license will be issued upon receipt by the city of:
            1.   A copy of the Certificate of Achievement for passing the
electrical exam offered by the Texas Cooperative Electrical Examination Board;
            2.   A copy of a reciprocal letter from the electrician's "base
city" which has a reciprocal agreement on file with the city and holds the
electrician's original license; or
            3.   A copy of a current SBCCI license.
   (B)   (1)   Application. Any person desiring a license required by this
section shall pick up an application for the exam at the building inspections
office of the city between 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, legal
holidays excepted.
('68 Code, § 11-47)
      (2)   Qualifications. No minor, nor any person not of lawful age will be
issued a master electrician's or contractor's license. All applicants for a
master or contractor license must have had four years of experience as a
journeyman electrician and must be at least 21 years of age. All applicants for
a journeyman electrical license must have had at least four years experience as
an apprentice electrician; except where applicant is a graduate of a recognized
trade school giving at least a two year curriculum, and have had at least two
years shop and building experience working at the electrical trade, which may
be concurrent. Applicants for an apprentice electrician license will not be
given an examination, but must be 16 years of age and be recommended by a
master or contractor electrician.
   (C)   Examination of applicant.
      (1)   Every person desiring to engage in any business or perform any work
for which a license is required under the provisions of this section shall
appear before the Electrical Inspector and pass an examination as to his or her
qualifications and competency for the class of license desired by him or her as
required by the provisions of this section. It shall be the duty of the
Electrical Inspector to determine by written examination the qualifications of
each applicant for the particular grade of license for which he or she has
applied.
      (2)   Persons holding licenses at the time this section becomes
effective, upon timely application for renewal, shall be issued a license
within the grades herein provided which most closely compares with the license
grade previously held.
('68 Code, § 11-48)
      (3)   Notice of results; passing grade. The Electrical Inspector shall
notify any applicant for a license under this section of his examination grade
within five days after the date of the examination. A minimum grade of 70%
shall be required for certification to be licensed.
('68 Code, § 11-49)
      (4)   Appeal from Texas Cooperative Electrical Examination Board. Any
person aggrieved by the action of the examination given under this subchapter
or by the results of such examination shall have the right, within 10 days from
the date of such examination, to appeal to the Texas Electrical Examination
Board.
('68 Code, § 11-50)
      (5)   Records to be kept. All examinations shall be kept at the Texas
Cooperative Electrical Examinations Board. ('68 Code, § 11-51)
   (D)   Age requirements for certain applicants. No person under 21 years of
age shall be issued a master electrician's license or a sign electrician's
license.
('68 Code, § 11-52)
   (E)   Fees.  
See
§ 150.016
   (F)   Issuance. A license required by this section shall be issued in the
name of the person certified by the Electrical Inspector.
('68 Code, § 11-54)
   (G)   Expiration and renewal. Each license issued under this section shall
expire 12 months after its issuance. Any holder of any license of any grade
issued under the provisions of this section who shall fail to secure a renewal
of such license within 30 days after its expiration shall be required to secure
a new license at the full first year fee.
('68 Code, § 11-55) (Ord. passed 12-13-51; Am. Ord. passed 2-14-52; Am. Ord. 2-
1979-4, passed 2-13-79; Am. Ord. 12-1986-63, passed 12-9-86; Am. Ord. 6-1990-
13, passed 6-12-90; Am. Ord. 4-1995-9, passed 4-25-95; Am. Ord. 12-1996-89,
passed 12-10-96; Am. Ord. 10-1997-84, passed 10-14-97; Am. Ord. 05-2000-32,
passed 5-9-00; Am. Ord. 6-2002-38, passed 6-11-02)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.076 LICENSEE NOT TO PERMIT USE OF NAME OR LICENSE BY ANOTHER.
   It shall be unlawful for any holder of any license of any grade issued under
this subchapter to allow his name or license to be used by any other person or
firm or corporation, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of obtaining a
permit or for performing work under his license.
('68 Code, § 11-56) (Ord. passed 12-13-51)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.077 UNLICENSED PERSON ON JOB; FALSE REPRESENTATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to send another person on any job
requiring a license in the capacity of an electrician or to knowingly permit or
allow such person to perform electrical work unless such other person is the
holder of and in possession of a valid electrician's license for the type of
work being done.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to represent himself as a licensed
electrician of any grade set out in this subchapter or to use the words
electrical contractor, master electrician, electrician or words of similar
import or meaning on signs, cards, stationery, or by any other manner unless
the person is the holder of a valid license of the grade for which he is
representing himself as being licensed.
('68 Code, § 11-57) (Ord. passed 12-13-51; Am. Ord. 2-1979-4, passed 2-13-79)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.078 PERFORMING AND ENGAGING IN WORK OTHER THAN THAT AUTHORIZED BY
LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for the holder of any license issued under the
provisions of this subchapter to engage in any phase of the electrical business
or perform any work at the electrical trade other than such business or work
authorized by the class of license held by him, except that a helper or any
apprentice electrician may perform work laid out for him by a holder of a
license, and then only while he is in the presence of and being supervised by
the holder of a license.
('68 Code, § 11-58) (Ord. passed 12-13-51)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.079 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Any license of any grade issued under this subchapter may be revoked at any
time by the City Council for violation of any of the provisions of this
subchapter, and the offending person shall be prohibited from engaging in or
performing the grade of work specified by the revoked license within the city
for a period of one year, after which time the license may be renewed at the
regular yearly renewal fee.
('68 Code, § 11-59) (Ord. passed 12-13-51)
§ 150.080 WORK PERMITS.
   (A)   Required; exceptions.
      (1)   Except as otherwise specifically provided, it shall be unlawful for
any person to construct, install, alter, extend, repair or replace any
electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment of any voltage, for light, heat,
power, decoration, amusement or any other purpose, without first securing a
permit so to do from the Electrical Inspector. A separate permit shall be
required for each separate building, store space or apartment, whether such a
unit is metered separately or conjunctively, and a permit shall be taken on all
such units whether supplied from a central metering station or directly from an
electrical supply agency.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to a manufacturing concern, or any
other concern, which engages a licensed maintenance electrician, for
maintenance and repair work, who is regularly employed by such concern. Such
maintenance electrician shall be entitled to do new electrical construction
work on premises owned or leased by his employer without a permit.
('68 Code, § 11-70)
   (B)   Application. In order to procure a permit required by this section,
the person desiring to do such work shall make written application to the
Electrical Inspector for a permit, submitting plans for such work in such
application.
('68 Code, § 11-71)
   (C)   Fee.
      (1)   The applicant for a permit under this section shall pay to the
building inspection office a fee in the amount prescribed by the Uniform
Administrative Code, 1982 edition, as modified by §
150.016.
      (2)   Payment shall be made of any and all fees that may become due and
owing by the contractor or master electrician. These fees may be billed to the
contractor and paid by the tenth of the following month, providing there is a
signed authorization in the Building Inspections Office listing all personnel
authorized to call for permits in the name of the company. A $25 late fee shall
be assessed to all accounts not current by the tenth of the following month.
Any account past due more than 60 days will lose all billing rights for six
months, and no permits shall be issued until the account is paid in full.
('68 Code, § 11-72)
   (D)   To whom issued. A permit required by this section shall be issued only
to a person licensed under this subchapter to do the work contemplated by the
permit or to a home owner doing his own work pursuant to §
150.061.
('68 Code, § 11-73) (Ord. passed 12-13-51; Am. Ord. passed 2-14-52; Am. Ord. 5-
1976-19, passed 5-11-76; Am. Ord. 7-1984-27, passed 7-10-84; Am. Ord. 7-1996-
34, passed 7-23-96; Am. Ord. 3-2002-17, passed 3-26-02)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.081 REPORTS OF PERMITS ISSUED AND FEES PAID; DISPOSITION OF FEES
COLLECTED.
   The Electrical Inspector shall, upon the first of each month, make a written
report to the City Council showing all permits issued and [permit] fees
collected by him under the provisions of this subchapter for the preceding
month, and all such fees shall be paid into the city treasury.
('68 Code, § 11-74) (Ord. passed 12-13-51)
INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING AND BUILDINGS
§ 150.082 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter applies to all industrialized housing or buildings erected
or installed in the city.
(Ord. 11-2005-75, passed 11-8-05)
§ 150.083 RESERVATION OF AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Pursuant to Tex. Occupations Code Ch. 1202, the city hereby reserves
the following authority concerning industrialized housing and buildings:
      (1)   Land use and zoning requirements;
      (2)   Building setback requirements;
      (3)   Side and rear yard requirements;
      (4)   Site planning and development and property line requirements;
      (5)   Subdivision control; and
      (6)   Landscape architectural requirements.
   (B)   Except as provided by Tex. Occupations Code § 1202.253, the
requirements and regulations of the city shall not be in conflict with Tex.
Occupations Code Ch. 1202 or with any other state law relating to
transportation, erection, installation, or use of industrialized housing or
buildings. Any such city requirements and regulations shall be reasonable and
uniformly applied and enforced without distinctions as to whether the housing
or buildings are manufactured or are constructed on-site.
   (C)   The building and permit fees charged by the city for the inspection of
industrialized housing or buildings to be located in the city shall not exceed
the fees charged by the city for the equivalent inspection of a building
constructed on-site.
(Ord. 11-2005-75, passed 11-8-05)
§ 150.084 DEFINITIONS.
   In this subchapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSION. The Texas Commission of Licensing and Regulation.
   COUNCIL. The Texas Industrialized Building Code Council.
   DEPARTMENT. The Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation.
   EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR. The Executive Director of the Department.
   INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING.
      (1)   A commercial structure that is:
         (a)   Constructed in one or more modules or constructed using one or
more modular components built at a location other than the commercial site; and
         (b)   Designed to be used as a commercial building when the module or
the modular component is transported to the commercial site and erected or
installed.
      (2)   INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING includes the structure's plumbing, heating,
air conditioning and electrical systems.
      (3)   INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING does not include a commercial structure
that exceeds three stories or 49 feet in height as measured from the finished
grade elevation at the building entrance to the peak of the roof.
      (4)   INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING includes a permanent commercial structure
and a commercial structure designed to be transported from one commercial site
to another commercial site.
   INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING.
      (1)   A residential structure that is:
         (a)   Designed for the occupancy of one or more families;
         (b)   Constructed in one or more modules or constructed using one or
more modular components built at a location other than the permanent site; and
         (c)   Designed to be used as a permanent residential structure when
the module or the component is transported to the permanent site and erected or
installed on a permanent foundation system.
      (2)   INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING includes the structure's plumbing, heating,
air conditioning and electrical systems.
      (3)   INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING does not include:
         (a)   A residential structure that exceeds three stories or 49 feet in
height as measured from the finished grade elevation at the building entrance
to the peak of the roof;
         (b)   Housing constructed of a sectional or panelized system that does
not use a modular component; or
         (c)   A ready-built home constructed in a manner in which the entire
living area is contained in a single unit or section at a temporary location
for the purpose of selling and moving the home to another location.
   MODULAR COMPONENT. A structural part of housing or a building constructed at
a location other than the building site in a manner that prevents the
construction from being adequately inspected for code compliance at the
building site without:
      (1)   Damage; or
      (2)   Removal and reconstruction of a part of the housing or building.
(Ord. 11-2005-75, passed 11-8-05)
§ 150.085 BUILDING CODES.
   (A)   Industrialized housing and buildings, modules and modular components
that are erected or installed in the city must be constructed to meet or exceed
the requirements and standards of the following codes:
      (1)   National Fire Protection Association - National Electrical Code,
2002 Edition, including appendices;
      (2)   The International Building Code, 2003 edition, including appendices
C and F, published by the International Code Council;
      (3)   The International Fuel Gas Code, 2003 edition, published by the
International Code Council;
      (4)   The International Plumbing Code, 2003 edition, including appendices
E, F, and G, published by the International Code Council;
      (5)   The International Mechanical Code, 2003 edition, published by the
International Code Council; and
      (6)   The International Residential Code, 2003 edition, including
appendix K, published by the International Code Council.
   (B)   Other codes referenced in any of the mandatory building codes adopted
in division (A) above shall be considered part of the requirements of these
codes to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
   (C)   A decal or insignia placed on a transportable modular section or
modular component in accordance with rules of the Commission shall be
sufficient to indicate compliance with the mandatory building codes listed in
division (A) above.
(Ord. 11-2005-75, passed 11-8-05)
§ 150.086 ON-SITE INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Building Official of the city shall inspect all construction
involving industrialized housing and buildings to be located in the city to
ensure compliance with designs, plans, and specifications, including inspection
of:
      (1)   The construction of the foundation system; and
      (2)   The erection and installation of the modules or modular components
on the foundation.
   (B)   An inspection under division (A) above shall be conducted:
      (1)   At the permanent site, if the inspection is of industrialized
housing; and
      (2)   At the commercial site, if the inspection is of industrialized
buildings.
   (C)   At a minimum, the Building Official shall:
      (1)   Inspect all on-site construction and the attachment of the
structure to the foundation to assure completion and attachment in accordance
with the approved design package and any unique foundation system or on-site
details;
      (2)   Perform an overall visual inspection for obvious nonconformity to
the applicable code, require final inspections along with any tests which are
required by the approved installation instructions, on-site construction
documentation, and/or applicable code, and require the correction of
deficiencies identified by the tests or discovered in final inspection;
      (3)   Notify the Executive Director of any damage to a module or modular
component resulting from transportation to, or handling at, the building site
which is not corrected by the industrialized builder; notify the Executive
Director of any noncompliance to, or deviation from, the approved building
system or applicable code; and report to the Executive Director any violation
of the rules and regulations of the Commission concerning industrialized
housing and buildings. These notices and reports shall be submitted by
certified mail.
(Ord. 11-2005-75, passed 11-8-05)
§ 150.087 REGULATION OF INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING AND BUILDINGS.
   The on-site construction or installation of industrialized housing and
buildings in the city shall be regulated as follows:
   (A)   The Building Official shall require and review, for compliance with
the mandatory building codes, a complete set of designs, plans, and
specifications bearing the Council's seal of approval.
   (B)   All applicable city permits and licenses shall be obtained before
construction begins on a building site.
   (C)   All modules or modular components shall bear an approved decal or
insignia indicating inspection by the Department in accordance with rules of
the Commission.
   (D)   The Building Official shall conduct the inspections required under §
150.086 above.
(Ord. 11-2005-75, passed 11-8-05)
§ 150.088 REGULATION OF SINGLE-FAMILY AND DUPLEX INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING.
   (A)   Single-family or duplex industrialized housing in the city must have
all city permits and licenses that are applicable to other single-family or
duplex dwellings.
   (B)   Single-family or duplex industrialized housing in the city shall
comply with the following regulations:
      (1)   The single-family or duplex industrialized housing must have a
value equal to or greater than the median taxable value for each single-family
dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing
is proposed to be located as determined by the most recent certified tax
appraisal roll for Johnson County;
      (2)   The single-family or duplex industrialized housing shall have
exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration
compatible with the single-family dwellings located with 500 feet of the lot on
which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located;
      (3)   The single-family or duplex industrialized housing shall comply
with municipal aesthetic standards, building setbacks, side and rear yard
offsets, subdivision control, architectural landscaping, square footage, and
other site requirements applicable to single-family dwellings; and
      (4)   The single-family or duplex industrialized housing shall be
securely fixed to a permanent foundation.
      (5)   For purposes of division (C)(1), VALUE means the taxable value of
the industrialized housing and the lot after installation of the housing.
   (C)   An industrialized housing permit is required for single-family or
duplex industrialized housing. An application for such permit shall be
submitted to the city. Such application shall consist of the following:
      (1)   A completed application on forms provided by the city;
      (2)   A legal description of the lot(s) on which the industrialized
housing is to be located;
      (3)   Documentation showing the total purchase price of the
industrialized housing and the value of the lot on which it is to be located.
The value of the lot shall be the taxable value of the lot as certified by the
Johnson County Appraisal District; and
      (4)   Photos and/or other documentation that clearly shows that the
design of the industrialized housing is compatible with the design of single-
family dwelling units located within 500 feet of the lot on which the
industrialized housing is proposed to be located.
   (D)   When evaluating the compatibility of the industrialized housing, the
city shall consider the following:
      (1)   Exterior siding;
      (2)   Roofing;
      (3)   Roof pitch;
      (4)   Foundation fascia;
      (5)   Fenestration; and
      (6)   All municipal aesthetic standards.
   (E)   Except as provided above, the city shall not adopt any regulation that
is more restrictive for industrialized housing than that required for a new
single-family or duplex dwelling constructed on site.
   (F)   Nothing in this subchapter relieves an applicant for an industrialized
housing permit from conforming to all requirements of the Zoning Ordinance,
Subdivision Ordinance or any other regulation or ordinance that applies to the
development of single-family or duplex dwelling units in the city.
   (G)   The provisions of this section do not:
      (1)   Limit the authority of the city to adopt regulations to protect
historic properties or historic districts; or
      (2)   Affect deed restrictions.
(Ord. 11-2005-75, passed 11-8-05)
MOVING OF STRUCTURES
§ 150.090 MOVING STRUCTURES INTO AND WITHIN THE CITY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Moving existing structures into, or from one location within the city
to another location within the city, is prohibited. However, the City Council
may, at a properly noticed public hearing, approve or deny the movement of a
structure into the city or within the city based on testimony of adjacent
property owners and/or the historic significance of the structure. The City
Council shall have the sole authority to determine the historical significance
of the structure. The following criteria shall be considered by the City
Council when determining whether a structure is historically significant to the
community:
      (1)   The structure’s significance in history, architecture, archaeology,
or culture;
      (2)   Its association with events that have made a significant
contribution to patterns of local, regional, state, or national history;
      (3)   Its association with an important person or historical figure;
      (4)   Its embodiment of distinctive characteristics of a type, style,
period, or method of construction or architecture; or
      (5)   Whether it represents the work of a master designer, engineer,
architect, builder, or craftsman.
   (B)   Any structures approved by the Council to be moved into or within the
city shall comply with the requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. 10-2017-65, passed 10-10-17)
§ 150.091 OVERHEAD UTILITY LINES TO BE PROTECTED; NOTICE TO AND DUTIES OF
OWNERS OF OVERHEAD UTILITY LINES.
   It shall be the duty of the person moving any structure to give advanced
written notice of the move to any and all utility companies maintaining
overhead utility lines across or along any street or alley included in the
designated route along which such structure is to be moved. Utility companies
shall be provided with advanced written notice of the designated route and time
when the move is to be undertaken so the utility company can determine if it is
necessary to move or alter utility lines along the designated route. After
receiving such notice, it shall be the duty of the utility company or companies
maintaining such overhead utility lines to move or alter utility lines along
the designated route. The movers shall under no conditions nor under any
circumstances cut, raise, remove, or damage any overhead utility lines found
across or along any street or alley, except under the direction of an employee
of the utility company owning such wire or wires.
('68 Code, § 6-43) (Am. Ord. 01-2005-12, passed 1-25-05; Am. Ord. 10- 2017-65,
passed 10-10-17) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.092 DOLLIES TO HAVE PNEUMATIC TIRES.
   No structure may be moved along or over any street within the city on
dollies unless such dollies are equipped with pneumatic tires.
('68 Code, § 6-44) (Am. Ord. 01-2005-12, passed 1-25-05; Am. Ord. 10-2017-65,
passed 10-10-17) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.093 LIGHTS REQUIRED FOR NIGHT MOVING OR STOPPING.
   No structure shall be moved at night, nor be stopped or left on any street
or alley of the city at night, unless there shall be attached to each end of
such structure a red light or lantern visible for at least 300 feet along such
street or alley.
('68 Code, § 6-45) (Am. Ord. 01-2005-12, passed 1-25-05; Am. Ord. 10-2017-65,
passed 10-10-17) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.094 TREES NOT TO BE DAMAGED.
   Structures shall not be moved on any street where projections or sides of
such structures shall project far enough to necessitate cutting of limbs or
otherwise damaging or defacing of trees.
('68 Code, § 6-46) (Am. Ord. 01-2005-12, passed 1-25-05; Am. Ord. 10-2017-65,
passed 10-10-17) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.095 POLICE ESCORT.
   In the event it is necessary for the Police Department, in the opinion of
the Chief of Police, to furnish an escort to direct traffic along the route any
structure thereof is being moved pursuant to a permit issued under this
subchapter, the person moving such structure shall pay, for such escort, the
sum of $1,000 for an eight- hour day; provided, however, that the minimum
charge for a police escort shall be $250. Such charge shall be in addition to
the permit fee.
('68 Code, § 6-47) (Am. Ord. 01-2005-12, passed 1-25-05; Am. Ord. 10-2017-65,
passed 10-10-17) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.096 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall move or transport any structure over or along or across any
street or alley of the city until a written permit has been issued by the city
authorizing the movement of such structure as provided in this section. The
permit shall expire after 45 days if the structure has not been moved. In
addition, the moving permit shall not be considered to be a building permit.
('68 Code, § 6-48) (Am. Ord. 01-2005-12, passed 1-25-05; Am. Ord. 10-2017-65,
passed 10-10-17) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.097 APPLICATION.
   Application for a permit under this subchapter shall be filed with the
Building Official. Such application shall be signed by the applicant and shall
state the location of the structure to be moved, the lot and block where it is
to be placed after it is moved, the proposed route in moving the structure and
the time desired within which to move it. A site plan shall be submitted with
the application showing all dimensions of the lot, the structure, and the
location of the structure on the lot. All setbacks shall conform to the city’s
ordinances. An application for a permit to move a structure will be reviewed by
staff for compliance with this subchapter.
('68 Code, § 6-49) (Am. Ord. 01-2005-12, passed 1-25-05; Am. Ord. 10-2017-65,
passed 10-10-17) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.098.a REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Every firm, business, or organization requesting a permit for moving any
structure under the provisions herein shall be required to register with the
City Building Official and the registration shall be filed with the City Clerk.
The fee for such business registration shall be $100.
(Ord. 01-2005-12, passed 1-25-05; Am. Ord. 10-2017-65, passed 10-10-17)
§ 150.098.b ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The Building Official shall determine if the moving of a structure for
which application for a moving permit has been made may be accomplished safely
and in full compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. The Building
Official shall issue a permit to the applicant upon approval of the Council to
move the structure, payment of the required fee and compliance with all other
prerequisites thereto as provided in this subchapter.
   (B)   The owner of the structure shall be made a party to the moving permit
and shall be required to sign the application and is subject to the conditions
and requirements provided herein.
('68 Code, § 6-57) (Am. Ord. 01-2005-12, passed 1-25-05; Am. Ord. 10-2017-65,
passed 10-10-17)
§ 150.099 CERTIFICATE OF CURRENT TAX STATUS PREREQUISITE.
   No permit shall be issued to move any structure located on any land in the
city until the applicant therefor files with the City Building Official a
certificate issued by the Johnson County Tax Assessor showing that all taxes,
penalties and interest due the city on such structure and premises have been
paid.
('68 Code, § 6-58) (Am. Ord. 01-2005-12, passed 1-25-05; Am. Ord. 10-2017-65,
passed 10-10-17)
Cross-reference:
   Charge for tax certificate, see §
35.04
§ 150.100 BOND AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   No permit to move any structure shall be issued until the registered
mover shall have deposited a bond in the sum of $25,000, which bond shall be
signed by the applicant and two or more good and sufficient sureties or by the
applicant and a surety company authorized to make surety bonds in this state.
Such bond shall be conditioned so as to indemnify any and all persons and the
city for any damage or loss to property or person or reasonable and necessary
expenses caused to or incurred by any person as a result of the moving of any
house or other building. In the event the applicant is in the house-moving
business and contemplates moving more than one house or other building in the
period of one year, he or she may make a blanket bond in the sum of $25,000,
conditioned as stated above, but covering all buildings and houses for which he
or she may obtain such permits during the year, and such bond shall be in force
for a period of one year and it shall apply to any and all houses or other
buildings that may be moved by the applicant during such year. All such bonds
shall be submitted to the Building Official for approval and filing with the
City Secretary.
('68 Code, § 6-50)
   (B)   No permit to move any house or other building shall be issued until
the owner therefore shall have deposited a bond in the sum of $15,000, which
bond shall be signed by the owner and two or more good and sufficient sureties
or by the applicant and a surety company authorized to make surety bonds in
this state. Such bond shall be conditioned so as to indemnify any and all
persons and the city for any damage or loss to property or person or reasonable
and necessary expenses caused to or incurred by any person as a result of the
removal or reconstruction of any structure. If the structure has not been
removed or reconstructed, whichever the case may be, within one year of the
issuance of the moving permit, the owner shall be deemed to be in default and
the funds shall be used to complete the removal of the structure.
   (C)   Prior to issuing any permit for moving of a building by the Building
Official, the authority responsible for moving the building shall have on file,
in the City Secretary’s office, a certificate showing that the authority has
obtained and is maintaining liability insurance in the amount of not less than:
 
1 . Property damage, per accident          $100,000
2 . Personal injury or death, per person   $100,000
3 . Personal injury or death, per accident $300,000
 
(Ord. 01-2005-12, passed 1-25-05; Am. Ord. 10-2017-65, passed 10-10- 17)
Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.101 FEE.
   The fee for a permit to move a structure is $250. If police escort is
required under the provisions of §
150.095, an additional fee as specified in such section shall be paid. Permit
fees required herein shall be applied to cover the costs of investigating the
application and of issuing the permit. Such fees shall be deposited in the
general fund of the city.
('68 Code, § 6-51) (Am. Ord. 01-2005-12, passed 1-25-05; Am. Ord. 10-2017-65,
passed 10-10-17) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.102 [RESERVED].
§ 150.103 NOTICE OF ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (A)   If an application meets the requirements of this subchapter, the city
shall send notice of public hearing at a meeting of the City Council to all
owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the property on which the
structure is proposed to be moved. Such notice shall be given not less than ten
days before the date set for hearing at a meeting of the City Council by
posting such notice properly addressed and postage paid to each tax payer as
the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll.
   (B)   The City Council shall have the right to approve or deny the issuance
of the permit under this subchapter when, in the judgement of the City Council,
no substantial injury or damage will be caused to the property lying within 200
feet of the lot on which the proposed structure will be placed.
('68 Code, § 6-59) (Ord. passed 3-10-59; Am. Ord. passed 8-8-61; Am. Ord. 01-
2005-12, passed 1-25-05; Am. Ord. 10-2017-65, passed 10-10- 17) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.104 ROUTE.
   The permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall indicate the
route to be followed in moving the structure and such route must be followed by
the permittee.
('68 Code, § 6-60) (Am. Ord. 01-2005-12, passed 1-25-05; Am. Ord. 10-2017-65,
passed 10-10-17) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.105 INSPECTION PRIOR TO ISSUING PERMIT.
   (A)   The Building Official shall inspect the structure before issuing a
permit for moving. If the Building Official deems the structure to be in a
condition that is unsafe or dangerous to move over public streets or grounds;
or if the structure does not reasonably meet the requirements of this code and
other building regulations pertaining thereto and cannot be made to meet the
requirements at its new location, if within the city; no permit shall be
issued.
   (B)   For structures that are located outside the corporate limits of the
city, the applicant may obtain an inspection by an authority knowledgeable and
qualified to inspect building structures in place of the city staff inspector
as indicated in division (A) above. The inspection authority must be approved
by the City Building Official prior to the inspection of the structure. The
inspection report shall be signed by the inspection authority and the signature
must be notarized and submitted to the City Building Official prior to issuing
the permit.
(Ord. 01-2005-12, passed 1-25-05; Am. Ord. 10-2017-65, passed 10-10-17)
RENTAL HOUSING
§ 150.115 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish minimum standards for the
initial and continued occupancy of leased dwellings used for human habitation
within the jurisdiction of the city. These standards shall apply to new and
existing leased dwellings.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 150.116 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND TENANTS.
   (A)   Tenants of a leased dwelling shall give the owner thereof access to
any part of such dwelling or accessory structure and its premises at all
reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are
necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of city ordinances or with
any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of city ordinances.
   (B)   Owners and tenants of a leased dwelling shall be responsible for
maintaining a safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel from any point
in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with
the International Fire Code.
   (C)   Owners of a leased dwelling shall be responsible for maintaining in a
clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling,
accessory structures, and premises thereof.
   (D)   Tenants of a leased dwelling shall be responsible for maintaining in a
clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, accessory structures
and premises thereof which they occupy and control.
   (E)   Every leased dwelling shall be supplied with approved containers and
covers for storage of refuse as required by city ordinances, and the tenant of
such dwelling shall be responsible for the removal of refuse.
   (F)   Every boarding house and rooming house shall be supplied with approved
containers and covers for storage of refuse as required by city ordinances, and
the owner of such boarding house or rooming house shall be responsible for the
removal of refuse.
   (G)   Tenants of a leased dwelling unit shall keep all supplied plumbing
fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for
the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation of the same.
   (H)   The owner of a boarding house or rooming house shall be responsible
for keeping all supplied plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary
condition.
   (I)   The owner shall reside in a boarding house and assume responsibility
for the operation of the boarding house.
   (J)   It shall be unlawful for a tenant to destroy, deface, impair or allow
the destruction, defacing, or impairment of any of the premises, facilities,
structures or equipment, or any part of the leased/let property.
   (K)   No owner or representative shall block, remove, shut off, or
discontinue any water, sewer, equipment or utility, which is required by
ordinance or law for any occupied leased dwelling, except for such temporary
interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in
process or during temporary emergencies.
   (L)   State of Texas law governing the respective responsibilities of
landlords and tenants under agreements for rental housing are enumerated in
Tex. Property Code Chs. 91 and 92.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 150.117 MAINTENANCE OF LEASED/LET PROPERTIES.
   (A)   The city shall compile and maintain a list of dwellings leased or let
for occupancy.
   (B)   Leased/let properties shall comply with federal, state, and local laws
and ordinances and the most recently adopted version of the International
Property Maintenance Code.
   (C)   Complaints alleging a violation may be generated by the public, city
staff members, or personnel from other agencies.
   (D)   Upon receiving a complaint of an alleged violation, the Code Official
shall cause the property to be inspected.
   (E)   If the Code Official deems a leased/let property substandard, all
repairs and/or abatement procedures shall comply with the provisions of the
property maintenance subchapter of this chapter, §§ 150.140, et seq.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 150.118 NEGLIGENT PROPERTIES.
   (A)   Leased/let properties with three or more documented violations of
federal, state, or local laws and/or ordinances within a 12-month period shall
be deemed a negligent property and shall be registered in the Negligent
Property Program (NPP). The city shall provide written notice to the owner of
each property designated to participate in the NPP. The property owner may
appeal the designation to the Building Standards Commission in the manner
provided by § 150.150.
   (B)   Properties registered in the NPP shall pay an annual registration fee
of $100 and shall be subject to an inspection schedule necessary to verify
abatement of all documented violations and ensure continued compliance with
federal, state, and local laws and ordinances.
   (C)   When documented violations on a negligent property have been abated in
accordance with applicable federal, state, and local laws and ordinances, a
certificate of compliance shall be issued to the property owner.
   (D)   Registration in the NPP shall be for a minimum period of 24 months
from the date the most recent certificate of compliance is issued.
   (E)   If a property is registered in the NPP and is cited for one or more
documented violations, the property shall remain on the NPP for a minimum of 24
months from the date the most recent certificate of compliance is issued.
   (F)   Properties must have no documented violations within a 24- month
period to be removed from the NPP.
   (G)   If a property registered in the NPP is sold, or ownership is otherwise
transferred, and it remains as lease/let property, the new owner(s) may appeal
to the Building and Standards Commission in the manner provided by § 150.150 to
have the property removed from the NPP registration list. The Building and
Standards Commission shall have the authority to act upon such appeal.
   (H)   In deciding whether to remove a property from the NPP, the Commission
may consider, among other factors, whether violations currently exist on the
property, the compliance history of the new owner(s) in the city or other
jurisdictions, and the financial capability of the new owner(s) to correct
documented violations and avoid future violations.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 150.119 OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall let to another for occupancy or use as a human
habitation, any temporary housing for more than 30 consecutive days or more
than 45 cumulative days in any calendar year.
   (B)   In addition to the minimum area requirements of Table 404.5 of the
International Property Maintenance Code, every dwelling unit shall contain not
less than 400 square feet of habitable floor area for the first adult occupying
the unit. An additional 100 square feet of habitable area shall be required for
each additional adult occupying the unit. An additional 50 square feet of
habitable area shall be required for each child occupying the unit.
   (C)   A kitchen shall have not less than 60 square feet of floor area, at
least four square feet of sink area in one sink and at least ten square feet of
food prep area (countertop).
   (D)   Cellars shall not be used for habitable spaces.
   (E)   Basements shall not be used for habitable spaces unless:
      (1)   The floor and walls are substantially watertight; and
      (2)   The total window area, total openable window area and ceiling
height are equal to those required for habitable spaces; and
      (3)   The required minimum window area of every habitable space is
entirely above the grade adjoining such window area, except where the window or
windows face a stairwell, window well or access way.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 150.120 FUEL GAS SYSTEM.
   (A)   New fuel gas systems shall comply with Chapter 24 of the most recently
adopted version of the International Residential Code.
   (B)   Existing fuel gas systems shall be pressure tested in accordance with
Section G2417 of the most recently adopted version of the International
Residential Code:
      (1)   At least once every five years; or
      (2)   Whenever the fuel gas system is altered or repaired; or
      (3)   he Code Official has reason to believe the system is damaged or
leaking.
   (C)   Installations, both existing and new, and parts thereof shall be
maintained in proper operating condition in accordance with the original design
and in a safe condition. Devices or safeguards which are required by city
ordinances shall be maintained in compliance with the code edition under which
they were installed. The owner shall be responsible for maintenance of fuel gas
systems. To determine compliance with this provision, the Code Official shall
have the authority to require a fuel gas system to be re-inspected.
   (D)   Additions, alterations, renovations or repairs to fuel gas systems
shall conform to that required for new systems without requiring the existing
installation to comply with all of the requirements of this code. Additions,
alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing fuel gas system to become
unsafe, hazardous or overloaded. Minor additions, alterations, renovations and
repairs to existing fuel gas systems shall meet the provisions for new systems,
unless such work is done in the same manner and arrangement as was in the
existing fuel gas system, is not hazardous and is approved.
   (E)   Leased or let dwellings supplied with fuel gas shall have operational
carbon monoxide detector(s) installed in the dwelling, sufficient to provide
appropriate protection.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 150.121 ELECTRICAL SYSTEM.
   (A)   With the exception of the requirements listed in this section,
electrical systems and equipment lawfully in existence at the time of the
adoption of this ordinance may have their use, maintenance and repair continued
if the use, maintenance and repair is in accordance with the original design
and no hazard to life, health or property has been created by the electrical
system and equipment.
   (B)   Any additions, alterations or repairs of electrical systems shall
conform to Section 3401.4 of the currently adopted International Residential
Code and be maintained in a state of good repair and in good working order.
   (C)   Electrical systems for leased/let dwellings shall be grounded in
accordance with Section E3607 of the currently adopted International
Residential Code.
   (D)   Connections at service heads shall be in accordance with Sections
E3605.9.1 through E3605.9.7 of the currently adopted International Residential
Code.
   (E)   Tenants shall have ready access to all overcurrent devices protecting
the conductors supplying that dwelling.
   (F)   Fused neutrals are prohibited.
   (G)   All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring in leased/let
dwellings and accessory structures shall be maintained in a state of good
repair, safe, capable of being used. Electrical systems shall comply with the
requirements of NFPA 73, Standard for Electrical Inspections for Existing
Dwellings.
   (H)   Every dwelling shall be equipped with smoke detectors installed in all
sleeping areas. Smoke detectors shall be hard wired with battery backup.
   (I)   No leased/let dwelling unit shall be crosswired unless the electric
energy charges for that dwelling are paid for by the owner. If a complaint
alleges a leased/let dwelling is crosswired, the Code Official shall cause the
dwelling to be inspected. The Code Official may require certification from a
licensed electrician attesting the leased/let dwelling is not crosswired.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 150.140 PURPOSE.
   Substandard properties negatively affect the health, security, privacy and
stability of the community. The city declares every substandard building,
structure or property, as herein defined, within the jurisdiction of the city,
subject to repair, vacation, demolition or abatement as herein provided in
order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the occupants and the
public.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 150.141 CODES ADOPTED.
   (A)   The 2021 International Property Maintenance Code as well as approved
local amendments are fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this
section in its entirety. The material contained in the International Property
Maintenance Code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of
ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record and will be available for
public inspection and copying during regular business hours.
   (B)   The city adopts the provisions of Tex. Local Gov't Code Ch. 54, Subch.
C, and amendments thereto, if any, which is entitled “Quasi-Judicial
Enforcement of Health and Safety Ordinances” in a home-rule municipality, and
does declare the implementation of that subchapter.
   (C)   Properties shall comply with applicable federal, state and local laws
and all adopted city codes and ordinances.
   (D)   Unless otherwise stated, it shall be the responsibility of the
property owner, property manager (if so designated by the property owner), or
in some instances the tenant (if specified by city ordinance or lease agreement
between owner and tenant); all of whom shall be collectively referred to as the
“responsible party,” to comply with applicable federal, state and local laws
and all adopted city codes and ordinances.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 12-2019-75, passed 12-10- 19; Am.
Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 150.142 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated, the terms defined in the most recently
adopted version of the International Property Maintenance Code in addition to
the terms defined below, shall have the meaning ascribed, for the purposes of
implementing and interpreting the International Property Maintenance Code and
§§ 150.115 through 150.150 of this code.
   ACCESSORY SPACE. Any space in a dwelling used for bathrooms, toilet rooms,
laundry rooms, unfinished attics, foyers, closets, halls, connecting corridors,
storage spaces, cellars, utility spaces and similar areas not included in the
definition of habitable space.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling unit where sleeping units are let, with or
without meals, and the dwelling unit is not occupied as a single-family
dwelling. Occupants do not have exclusive access to kitchen and/or bathroom
facilities and have limited or no access to non-common areas of the dwelling
unit. Each occupant has a separate agreement with the owner and may be evicted
individually without affecting the other occupants.
   CELLAR. A portion of a dwelling located partly or wholly underground having
an inadequate access to light and air from windows located partly or wholly
below the level of the adjoining ground.
   CLEAN AND SANITARY. The absence of chemicals, organic material and other
biological agents detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of human life.
   CONDEMN. A final order of the Building and Standards Commission adjudging a
building, equipment, structure or property unfit for use or occupancy and a
public nuisance to the extent that the life, health, property, or safety of the
public or occupants are endangered, ordering the city to abate the condition by
demolition and/or removal of the hazard.
   CROSSWIRING. The condition where all or part of the electric service for one
dwelling unit is connected to or paid for through the electric meter that
serves another dwelling unit.
   DUPLEX. Any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented,
leased, or let to be occupied as two dwelling units or which is occupied as a
home or place of residency by two families living in independent dwelling
units.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure or portion thereof, occupied by, or
designed or intended for occupancy by, one or more persons for living purposes.
TEMPORARY HOUSING, as defined below, shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
   FAMILY. The functional equivalent of a traditional family; whose members are
a non-transient interactive group of persons jointly occupying a single
dwelling unit, including the joint use of and responsibilities for common areas
and sharing household activities and responsibilities, such as meals, chores,
household maintenance and expenses; and where, if the dwelling unit is rented,
all adult occupants have chosen to jointly occupy the entire premises of the
dwelling unit, under a single lease with joint use and responsibility for the
premises, and the makeup of the household occupying the unit is determined by
the residents of the dwelling unit rather than the landlord or property
manager. This definition shall not include any society, club, fraternity,
coterie, organization, or group of students or other individuals whose domestic
relationship is of a transitory or seasonal nature or for an anticipated
limited duration of a school term or terms or other similar determinable
period.
   FUEL GAS SYSTEM. All piping systems, appliances, equipment, devices,
apparatus and appurtenances that distribute or utilize fuel gas within a
structure or on a property.
   GENDER. Words having a masculine gender shall include the feminine gender.
   GRAFFITI. Any unauthorized inscription, word, signature, symbol, design, or
other marking of any sort that is etched, written, painted, drawn, or applied
in any other way to any structure, building, tree, vehicle, or property of any
sort, or to any portion or element thereof.
   IMPROVED SURFACE. As defined by §
96.01 of this code.
   KITCHEN. An area used, or designated to be used, for the preparation of
food.
   MULTI-FAMILY (APARTMENT). Any building or portion thereof, which is
designed, built, rented, leased, or let to be occupied as three or more
dwelling units which are occupied as a home or place of residency by three or
more families living in independent dwelling units.
   NEGLIGENT PROPERTY. Any leased/let property that has three or more
documented violations of federal, state, or local laws and/or ordinances within
a 12-month period.
   NEGLIGENT PROPERTY PROGRAM (NPP).  The city's mandatory inspection program
designed to eliminate and prevent substandard conditions on leased/let
properties.
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A written notification that documents and communicates
violations observed during an inspection.
   NOXIOUS AND INVASIVE PLANTS. As defined in Chapter 96 of this code.
   OVERCROWDING. Occupancy of a dwelling by more occupants than allowed or
permitted by the maximum occupancy requirements for habitable space in
accordance with the IPMC and any approved amendments.
   PLUMBING SYSTEM. The water supply and distribution pipes; plumbing fixtures
and traps; water treating or water using equipment; soil waste and vent pipes;
and sanitary and storm sewers and building drains; in addition to their
respective connections, devices and appurtenances within a structure or on a
premises.
   REFUSE. Waste materials defined as garbage or rubbish by the IPMC.
   SEWAGE. Any liquid waste containing animal, vegetable or chemical matter in
suspension or solution generated by residential, industrial, commercial,
institutional, agricultural and other occupancies. SEWAGE includes but is not
limited to waste generated by bathing, laundry, toilets, sinks, floor drains,
equipment wash areas, and secondary containment areas.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building or structure with only one dwelling unit,
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence for one
family.
   SUBSTANDARD. Any building, structure or property, or portion thereof which,
as the result of the development, use and/or conditions created thereon, exists
in any condition that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or
welfare of the public or occupants thereof, or violates any code or ordinance
of the city.
   SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished, or provided by, or under the control of, the
owner.
   TEMPORARY HOUSING. Any tent, trailer, recreational vehicle, or other
structure used for human shelter that is designed to be transportable and is
not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utility system on
the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days or more than 45 cumulative
days in any calendar year.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 150.143 SUBSTANDARD PROPERTY.
   (A)   Any building, equipment, structure or property, or portion thereof
which, as the result of the development, use and/or conditions created thereon,
exists any conditions that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety
or welfare of the public or occupants thereof, or violates any code or
ordinance of the city, is hereby deemed substandard.
   (B)   Substandard buildings, equipment, structures or properties shall be
repaired, removed from service, vacated, demolished and/or abated to comply
with provisions of this code and applicable ordinances of the city.
   (C)   Where inspection discloses defective material or design, improper
placement or unworkmanlike construction not conforming to the requirements of
city ordinances, the nonconforming work or material shall be removed, replaced
and re-inspected.
   (D)   Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation
of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety,
health and general welfare, not specifically covered by city ordinance shall be
determined by the Code Official.
   (E)   Complaints alleging a violation may be generated by the public, city
staff members, or personnel from other agencies.
   (F)   Upon receiving a complaint of an alleged violation, the Code Official
shall cause the property to be inspected.
   (G)   A written inspection report noting any violations discovered on the
property shall be forwarded to the Code Official to determine if the property
is substandard. If the Code Official deems the property substandard he may:
      (1)   Order the owner to abate, within a fixed period of time, violations
of any provisions of this code and applicable ordinances of the city;
      (2)   Order the occupants to vacate the property if conditions represent
an immediate danger to the occupants;
      (3)   Present charges to the Building and Standards Commission of
violations of ordinances on the property. The Building and Standards Commission
shall conduct a public hearing to consider the charges and/or order any
necessary abatements.
   (H)   Written notice of violation shall be served to the responsible party
by personal delivery, certified mail with return receipt requested, or by
delivery by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation
service. The notice of violation shall contain any orders to abate, repair,
remove from service, and/or vacate affected properties.
   (I)   If the property owner fails to repair, remove from service, vacate,
demolish and/or abate substandard conditions on a property within the fixed
period of time, the Code Official may present charges of violations of
ordinances to the Building and Standards Commission. The Building and Standards
Commission shall conduct a public hearing to consider the charges and issue
orders necessary to abate substandard conditions. In addition, the property
owner may be subject to penalties listed in this chapter.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 150.144 COMMISSION CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority vested in the city under Tex. Local Gov't
Code Ch. 54, Subch. C, a Building and Standards Commission is created which
shall be composed of seven regular members appointed for staggered two-year
terms.
   (B)   The Commission shall appoint from its members a Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson, who shall be selected at the January meeting of the Commission
each year or when a vacancy occurs.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 150.145 AUTHORITY OF COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Building and Standards Commission shall have all powers, duties
and responsibilities authorized by state law, it being the intent of the city
to fully implement Tex. Local Gov't Code Ch. 54, Subch. C, including
specifically the authority to hear and determine cases concerning alleged
violations of ordinances of the city:
      (1)   For the preservation of public safety, relating to the materials or
methods used to construct a building or improvement, including the foundation,
structural elements, electrical wiring or apparatus, plumbing and fixtures,
entrances, or exits; or
      (2)   Relating to the fire safety of a building or improvement, including
provisions relating to materials, types of construction or design, warning
devices, sprinklers or other fire suppression devices, availability of water
supply for extinguishing fires, or location, design, or width of entrances or
exits; or
      (3)   Relating to dangerously damaged or deteriorated buildings or
improvements; or
      (4)   Relating to conditions caused by accumulations of refuse,
vegetation, or other matter that creates breeding and living places for insects
and rodents; or
      (5)   Relating to a building code or to the condition, use, or appearance
of property in a municipality; or
      (6)   Relating to animal care and control; or
      (7)   Relating to water conservation measures, including watering
restrictions.
   (B)   The Building and Standards Commission as created and provided for
under the provisions of state law shall, in addition to the statutory duties
and responsibilities, have such additional duties and responsibilities as shall
be from time to time delegated by the City Council and shall, in addition,
determine such issues and render decisions in accordance therewith which may be
from time to time required of an appellate body. In such cases, a simple
majority of the members of the Building and Standards Commission shall be
sufficient to hear a case, unless by other law or ordinance a greater majority
shall be required.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 150.146 NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS/PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   (A)   Notice of public hearings before the Building and Standards Commission
shall be served by personal delivery, certified mail with return receipt
requested, or by delivery by the United States Postal Service using signature
confirmation service, to the record owners of the affected property, and each
holder of a recorded lien against the affected property, as shown by the
records in the office of the County Clerk of the county in which the affected
property is located if the address of the lienholder can be ascertained from
the deed of trust establishing the lien or other applicable instruments on file
in the office of the County Clerk.
   (B)   Notice of public hearings before the Building and Standards Commission
shall be served to all unknown owners, by posting a copy of the notice on the
front door of each improvement situated on the affected property or as close to
the front door as practical.
   (C)   Notice of public hearings before the Building and Standards Commission
shall be posted, personally delivered or mailed on or before the tenth day
before the date fixed for the public hearing conducted by the Building and
Standards Commission.
   (D)   Notice of public hearings before the Building and Standards Commission
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, on one
occasion on or before the tenth day before the date fixed for the public
hearing.
   (E)   Notice under this section may be in the form of a charging instrument
and shall be in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Include the street address and/or legal description of the affected
property;
      (3)   Include a general description of the improvements;
      (4)   Include a statement of the violation(s) and why the notice is being
issued;
      (5)   Include the name and address of the owner(s) of the affected
property, if that information can be determined from a reasonable search of the
instruments on file in the office of the County Clerk;
      (6)   If known, include the occupant(s), and other persons interested in
the affected property;
      (7)   Include the date, time and location of the proceedings before the
Building and Standards Commission if the code official presented charges of
violations before the Commission;
      (8)   Include any orders issued by the code official or the Building and
Standards Commission with the approved period of time to comply with such
orders;
      (9)   Include the property owner’s right to appeal.
   (F)   Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the code official shall not
be mutilated, destroyed or tampered with, or removed without authorization from
the code official.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 150.147 COMMISSION PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   The Building and Standards Commission shall adopt rules and procedures
in accordance with Tex. Local Gov't Code Ch. 54, Subch. C, governing the
conduct of hearings before the Commission.
   (B)   Meetings of the Building and Standards Commission shall be held at the
call of the Chairperson, the Code Official, and at other times as determined by
the Commission. All of the meetings shall be open to the public. The
Chairperson or in the Chairperson's absence, the Vice Chair or in the absence
of the Vice Chair, another member selected as an Acting Chairperson may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
   (C)   The Building and Standards Commission shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member on each question or the fact that a
member is absent or fails to vote. The Building and Standards Commission shall
keep records of its examinations and other official actions. The minutes and
records shall be filed in the office of the city secretary as public record.
   (D)   The concurring vote of a majority of the members present at a hearing
of Building and Standards Commission is necessary to take any action.
   (E)   At a public hearing, the city, acting through the Code Official, shall
present charges to the Building and Standards Commission of alleged violations
of ordinances on a property. The city shall present evidence and testimony
supporting the alleged violations of ordinances on said property.
   (F)   At a public hearing, the Building and Standards Commission shall
provide ample opportunity for the presentation of evidence and testimony by
respondents or persons opposing charges brought by the city relating to alleged
violations of ordinances on said property.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 150.148 FINDINGS OF THE COMMISSION.
   (A)   Following the presentation of evidence and testimony at a public
hearing, the Building and Standards Commission, by majority vote, may affirm or
decline charges of alleged violations of city ordinances on a property.
   (B)   If the Commission, by a majority vote, finds upon evidence presented
at the public hearing that the property is not in violation of applicable city
codes, the Commission shall order that the enforcement action cease, provided,
however, that such order shall neither prevent the Code Official from
instituting a new enforcement action for other violations the Code Official
alleges have been determined to exist, nor shall such order prevent the Code
Official from instituting a new enforcement action for the same violations if
the City Manager later determines that the conditions as determined by the
Commission have materially changed as to such violations.
   (C)   If the Commission, by a majority vote, finds upon evidence presented
at the public hearing that the building is in violation of applicable city
ordinances, the Commission may:
      (1)    Declare a property substandard;
      (2)   Order the owner to abate or repair, within a fixed period, any
ordinance violation identified on a property;
      (3)   Authorize the city to abate or repair, within a fixed period, any
ordinance violation identified on a property;
      (4)   Order, in an appropriate case, the immediate removal of persons or
property found on private property, entry on private property to secure the
removal if it is determined that conditions exist on the property that
constitute a violation of an ordinance, and order action to be taken as
necessary to remedy, alleviate, or remove any substandard building found to
exist;
      (5)   Issue orders or directives to the code official, peace officer of
the state, including a sheriff or constable or the chief of police of the
municipality, to enforce and carry out the lawful orders or directives of the
commission panel;
      (6)   Determine the amount and duration of the civil penalty the
municipality may recover as provided by Tex. Local Gov't Code, Ch. 54, §
54.017; and
      (7)   When the Commission finds defects or conditions of structures exist
to the extent that the life, health, property, or safety of the public are
endangered, condemn the substandard structures and authorize the city to remove
the structures and bring the grounds to a clean and sanitary condition.
   (D)   If, at the initial public hearing on a property, charges brought by
the city relating to alleged violations of ordinances are contested by any
party of record with an interest in the property the Building and Standards
Commission shall, if it finds that the structure should be condemned, order the
property owner to appear at a second hearing, not less than 28 days from the
date of the first hearing, and show cause why the Building and Standards
Commission shall not order the condemnation and removal of the substandard
structure.
   (E)   If the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee establishes at the hearing that
the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days and the, Commission
allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 30 days to repair, abate,
remove or demolish a substandard structure, the Commission shall establish
specific time schedules as the Commission determines are appropriate for the
commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner,
lienholder or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from
unauthorized entry while the work is being performed.
   (F)   If the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee establishes at the hearing that
the complexity and scope of the work prohibits the completion of all required
work within 90 days and the Commission allows the owner, lienholder or
mortgagee more than 90 days to repair, abate, remove or demolish a substandard
structure, the owner, lienholder or mortgagee shall:
      (1)   Within a reasonable fixed period set by the Commission, submit a
detailed plan of all repairs, abatement processes and/or demolitions required
to comply with city ordinances; and
      (2)   Within a reasonable fixed period set by the Commission, submit a
detailed time schedule for all repairs, abatement processes and/or demolitions
required to comply with city ordinances; and
      (3)   Within a reasonable fixed period set by the Commission, secure all
structures on the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while
the work is being performed; and
      (4)   Maintain the property in a clean and sanitary condition during the
performance of work including maintenance of the yard and other landscape on
the property.
   (G)   If the Commission grants an owner, lienholder or mortgagee, more than
90 days to repair, abate, remove or demolish a substandard structure on
property within the jurisdiction of the city and the value of the property and
all improvements exceed $50,000, the Commission may require the owner,
lienholder, or mortgagee to post a cash or surety bond or letter of credit or
third-party guaranty to cover the cost of the work ordered by the Commission.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 150.149 COMMISSION ORDERS.
   (A)    All orders of the Commission must allow a lienholder or mortgagee of
record at least 30 additional days to complete the ordered work in the event
the owner fails to comply with the order within the time provided for action by
owner, prior to remedial action by the city.
   (B)   Contents of order. The order of the Commission must contain at
minimum:
      (1)   An identification which is not required to be a legal description,
of the building and the property on which it is located;
      (2)   A description of each violation of minimum standards present in the
building;
      (3)   A description of each of the ordered actions, including a statement
that the owner may repair, if determined feasible by the Commission, or
demolish or remove at his option;
      (4)   If the order is that the building shall be removed or demolished, a
statement of the Commission's finding that conditions exist to the extent that
the life, health, property or safety of the public are endangered; and
      (5)   A statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove or demolish
the building or relocate the occupants of the building if the ordered action is
not taken within the time allowed, and charge the cost of such actions to the
owner and impose a lien against the property for all expenses incurred.
Expenses shall include a nuisance abatement fee of $100, an administrative fee
of $100, court/record filing fees and other actual expenses for each abatement/
action performed on each individual lot or parcel of land.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
§ 150.150 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person ordered to take emergency measures by the code official
shall have the right to appeal to the Cleburne Building and Standards
Commission, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 30
calendar days after the day the decision, notice, or order was served.
   (B)   An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true
intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the
requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means.
   (C)   The Building and Standards Commission shall conduct one or more public
hearings to consider an appeal on an emergency measure, decision, notice, or
order of the code official and may issue any lawful order permitted by state
law or this chapter.
   (D)   A copy of the final decision of the Building and Standards Commission
shall be mailed by first class mail, certified return receipt requested, to all
parties entitled to notice of the original public hearing.
   (E)   All persons aggrieved of a final decision of the Building and
Standards Commission may present a petition to any district court in Johnson
County, duly verified, setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole or
part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality.
   (F)   A petition of review must be presented to a district court within 30
calendar days of the date copies of the final decision are sent to interested
parties.
   (G)   If no appeals are taken from a final decision of the Building and
Standards Commission within the required period, the decision of the Building
and Standards Commission is, in all things, final and binding.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 04-2023-30, passed 4-25-23)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   It is an offense for a person, firm, company, or corporation to violate,
disobey, omit, neglect, or refuse to comply with or resist the enforcement of
any of the provisions of this chapter. Each day that a violation is permitted
to exist shall constitute a separate offense. Any offense for which no other
penalty is set forth in this chapter shall be subject to the penalty set forth
in §
10.99 of this code.
(Ord. 11-2018-96, passed 11-27-18)
CHAPTER 151: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
   
151.01   Statutory authorization
   
151.02   Findings of fact
   
151.03   Statement of purpose
   
151.04   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
151.05   Definitions
   
151.06   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
151.07   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
151.08   Establishment of floodplain development permit
   
151.09   Compliance
   
151.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.11   Interpretation
   
151.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
151.13   Administration
   
151.14   Provisions for flood hazard reduction
   
151.15   Severability
 
   
151.99   Penalties for noncompliance
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance
Act, Texas Water Code, § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local
government units to adapt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
Therefore, the City of Cleburne, Texas does ordain as follows:
(Am. Ord. 11-2012-68, passed 11-29-12)
§ 151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of Cleburne are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
('68 Code, § 6-71) (Ord. 3-1987-20, passed 3-10-87; Am. Ord. 11- 2012-68,
passed 11-29-12)
§ 151.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and streets and bridges located
in floodplains;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood-
blight areas; and
   (G)   Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area.
('68 Code, § 6-72) (Ord. 3-1987-20, passed 3-10-87; Am. Ord. 11- 2012-68,
passed 11-29-12)
§ 151.04 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other developments which may
increase flood damage;
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
('68 Code, § 6-73) (Ord. 3-1987-20, passed 3-10-87; Am. Ord. 11- 2012-68,
passed 11-29-12)
§ 151.05 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan
or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-
velocity flows, active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition, and unpredictable flow paths.
   APEX. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow
path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial
fan flooding can occur.
   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. A structure which is on the same parcel of property
as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to
the use of the principal structure.
   AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD. The land area that would be
innudated by the 1% annual chance (100 year) flood based on future conditions
hydrology.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO, AH, or VO Zone on the city's
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1% chance or greater-annual chance of
flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within the city
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may
be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed
rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone
A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Zones
A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that
level in any given year. Also called the BASE FLOOD.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its flood subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system.
   CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. For insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which
has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls,
shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM
or before January 1, 1975 for FIRMs effective before that date. “Existing
construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards, and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an
examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or
flood-related erosion hazards.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of the city on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. See FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see definition of “flooding.”)
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reductions.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent
of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized
flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound
engineering standards.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. See REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LEVEE. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
“manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the “start of
construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii)
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. See AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, being Pub. L. 97-348,
includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that altertaion affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started, or
if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before”start of
construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure”.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain
management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the city's floodplain management regulations. A structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations, is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum where specified) of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
('68 Code, § 6-74) (Ord. 3-1987-20, passed 3-10-87; Am. Ord. 11- 2012-68,
passed 11-29-12)
§ 151.06 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city.
('68 Code, § 6-75) (Ord. 3-1987-20, passed 3-10-87; Am. Ord. 11- 2012-68,
passed 11-29-12)
§ 151.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled,
“The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Johnson County Texas and Incorporated
Areas,” dated September 21, 2023, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps
and/or Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) dated December 4, 2012
and September 21, 2023 and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
('68 Code, § 6-76) (Ord. 3-1987-20, passed 3-10-87; Am. Ord. 4-1989-18, passed
4-11-89; Am. Ord. 11-1991-36, passed 11-12-91; Am. Ord. 11-2012-68, passed 11-
29-12; Am. Ord. 07-2023-47, passed 7-11-23)
§ 151.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with
the provisions of this chapter. If a lot or tract of land has any portion
inside the floodplain, a floodplain development permit is required prior to any
land development as such term is defined in §
151.05. The cost of the permit fee shall be $15.
('68 Code, § 6-77) (Ord. 3-1987-20, passed 3-10-87; Am. Ord. 11-1991-36, passed
11-12-91; Am. Ord. 11-2012-68, passed 11-29-12)
§ 151.09 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
charged without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure
to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of conditions,
shall constitute a misdemeanor.
('68 Code, § 6-78 (part)) (Ord. 3-1987-20, passed 3-10-87; Am. Ord. 7-1991-21,
passed 7-25-91; Am. Ord. 11-2012-68, passed 11-29-12) Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions,
shall prevail.
('68 Code, § 6-79) (Ord. 3-1987-20, passed 3-10-87; Am. Ord. 11- 2012-68,
passed 11-29-12)
§ 151.11 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the
governing body, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.
('68 Code, § 6-80) (Ord. 3-1987-20, passed 3-10-87; Am. Ord. 11- 2012-68,
passed 11-29-12)
§ 151.12 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the city or any official or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
('68 Code, § 6-81) (Ord. 3-1987-20, passed 3-10-87; Am. Ord. 11- 2012-68,
passed 11-29-12)
§ 151.13 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The City Engineer or his
designee is appointed the Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement
the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR
(National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain
management.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. Duties
and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      (1)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Review permit application to determine whether a proposed building
site will be reasonably safe from flooding.
      (3)   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter.
      (4)   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is
required.
      (5)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example: where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation.
      (6)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency which is Texas Water Development Board (TWDB), and also the
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      (7)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
      (8)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with §
151.07, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of §
151.14.
      (9)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain
Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and
AE on the City's FIRM unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community.
      (10)   Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community’s FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that
the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12.
   (C)   Permit procedures.
      (1)   Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be presented
to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include,
but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
         (a)   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new substantially improved structures;
         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
         (c)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or
architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the
floodproofing criteria of §
151.14(B)(2);
         (d)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
         (e)   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
division (B)(1) above.
      (2)   Approval or denial of a Floodplain Development Permit by the
Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this
chapter and the following relevant factors:
         (a)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         (b)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         (c)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         (d)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         (e)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         (f)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems;
         (g)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
         (h)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location where
applicable;
         (i)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to the
flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
         (j)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
for that area.
   (D)   Variance procedures.
      (1)   The Board of Adjustment as established by the Council of the city
shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements
of this chapter.
      (2)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and render judgment on any
appeal only when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
      (3)   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Board of
Adjustment may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
      (4)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
      (5)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
      (6)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in division (C)(2) of this section
have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre,
the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      (7)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of
this chapter, the Board of Adjustment may attached such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and
objectives of this chapter set forth in §
151.03.
      (8)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (9)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
      (10)   Prerequisite for granting variances:
         (a)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
         (b)   Variances shall only be issued upon showing a good and
sufficient cause; a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and a determination that the
granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.
         (c)   Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
      (11)   Variances may be issued by the city for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that the criteria outlined in divisions
(1) through (10) above are met and the structure or other development is
protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and
create no additional threats to public safety.
('68 Code, § 6-82) (Ord. 3-1987-20, passed 3-10-87; Am. Ord. 11- 2012-68,
passed 11-29-12) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.14 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   (A)   General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards, the
following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial
improvements:
      (1)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
      (2)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      (3)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
      (4)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation;
      (5)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of, flood waters into the system;
      (6)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
      (7)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (B)   Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base
flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in §§
151.07,
151.13(B)(8), or division (C)(4) of this section, the following provisions are
required:
      (1)   Residential construction.  New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement), elevated to at least two feet above the base flood elevation. A
registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this
division as proposed in §
151.13(C)(1)(a) is satisfied.
      (2)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure,
including attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, shall either have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated to a minimum of two feet above the
base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer or architect shall
develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the
construction and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are
in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this division.
A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be
maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
      (3)   Enclosures.  New construction and substantial improvements, with
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding, shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      (4)   Manufactured homes.
         (a)   All manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a
community’s FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
         (b)   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s FIRM on sites (i)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred ‘substantial damage’ as a
result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest
floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation
and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
         (c)   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with
Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM that are not subject to the
provisions of division (B)(4) of this section be elevated so that either:
            1.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is two feet above
the base flood elevation; and
            2.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers
or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less
than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
         (d)   Prohibit the placement of any manufactured housing within the
areas which have been identified as regulatory floodways.
      (5)   Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s FIRM either (i) be on
the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or (ii) be fully licensed and
ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of Article 4,
Section C(1) and the elevation and anchoring requirements for “manufactured
homes” in division (B)(4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
   (C)   Standards for subdivision proposals.
      (1)   All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall be consistent with §§
151.02 through
151.04.
      (2)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet Floodplain Development
Permit requirements of §§
151.08,
151.13(C), and the provisions of this section.
      (3)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser,
if not otherwise provided pursuant to §§
151.07 or division (B)(8) of this section.
      (4)   All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
      (5)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage.
   (D)   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones). Located within
the areas of special flood hazard established in §
151.07 of this chapter are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas
have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions
apply:
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated a minimum of two
feet above the base flood elevation.
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures:
         (a)   Have the lowest floor (including basement and attendant utility
and sanitary facilities) elevated to a minimum of two feet above the base flood
elevation.
      (3)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in §
151.13(C)(1)(a), are satisfied.
      (4)   Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
   (E)   Floodways. Floodways located within areas of special flood hazards
established in §
151.07 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris,
potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall
apply:
      (1)    Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      (2)   If division (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this section.
      (3)   Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Program Regulation, a community may permit
encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an
increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes
all of the provisions required by Section 65.12.
('68 Code, § 6-83) (Ord. 3-1987-20, passed 3-10-87; Am. Ord. 11- 2012-68,
passed 11-29-12; Am. Ord. 06-2022-47, passed 6-14-22) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.15 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said
holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 11-2012-68, passed 11-29-12; Am. Ord. 06-2022-47, passed 6-14-22)
§ 151.99 PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this court
order and other application regulations. Violation of the provisions of this
court order by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this court
order or fails to comply with any of the requirements shall upon conviction
thereof be fined not more than $500 for each violation, and in addition shall
pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent Cleburne from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
('68 Code, § 6-78 (part)) (Ord. 3-1987-20, passed 3-10-87; Am. Ord. 7-1991-21,
passed 7-25-91; Am. Ord. 11-2012-68, passed 11-29-12; Am. Ord. 06-2022-47,
passed 6-14-22)
CHAPTER 152: TRAILERS AND TRAILER PARKS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Definitions
   
152.02   Purpose and intent
   
152.03   Parking outside trailer parks; prohibited; temporary parking
   
152.04   Building permit; standards to be met
   
152.05   Sewage and refuse disposal
   
152.06   Waste and garbage disposal
Trailer Park License
   
152.15   Required; fee; display
   
152.16   Application
   
152.17   Securing in annexed areas
   
152.18   Revocation, suspension
   
152.19   Appeals
   
152.20   Issuance not a bar to city's powers
   
152.21   Inspection required prior to issuing license
 
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COTTAGE. Any fixed building or structure or part thereof located in a
trailer park used by a single family as living or sleeping quarters.
   OWNER or MANAGER. Any person who has the control, direction, maintenance or
supervision of a trailer park, whether as owner or otherwise. Executors,
administrators, guardians, receivers or trustees also may be regarded as
owners.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
society and their heirs, administrators, executors or assigns, agents, servants
and employees.
   STREET. Any street, alley, avenue, lane, boulevard, drive, public place or
highway commonly used for the purpose of travel within the corporate limits of
the city.
   TRAILER COACH. Any vehicle which is being used as sleeping or living
quarters, which is or may be mounted on wheels and which is or may be propelled
either by its own power or by another power-driven vehicle to which it is or
can be attached. The term “trailer coach” shall also cover and include a
trailer car, automobile trailer and house trailer.
   TRAILER PARK. Any lot, tract or parcel of land, used in whole or in part for
the accommodation of two or more trailer coaches by the day, week or for a
longer period of time, either for or without compensation, and shall include a
tract or parcel of land used in whole or in part upon which two or more
cottages are located and maintained for the accommodation of transients by day,
week or for a longer period of time for or without compensation, where in
addition thereto, parking facilities and accommodations are also provided for
two or more trailer coaches, or trailers, and shall also include any building,
structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended to be used as part of
the equipment of such trailer park.
('68 Code, § 27½-1) (Ord. passed 4-8-69)
§ 152.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT OF CHAPTER.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is:
   (A)   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for
safe, sanitary and suitable methods of construction and operation of present
and future trailer parks within the city.
   (B)   To assure that trailer parks shall not become a menace to public
health, morals, safety or welfare.
('68 Code, § 27½-2) (Ord. passed 4-8-69)
§ 152.03 PARKING OUTSIDE TRAILER PARKS; PROHIBITED; TEMPORARY PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any trailer coach on any
street, alley, highway, sidewalk, or other public place in the city for a
longer period than two hours in commercial area and for longer than 12 hours in
a residential area, providing that the approval of the abutting property owners
is first obtained.
   (B)   No trailer coach shall be parked, used or occupied on any tract of
ground within the city limits except in a fully license trailer park.
   (C)   (1)   The building inspector may permit the parking, use and occupancy
of a trailer coach outside of a duly licensed trailer park for a period of time
not exceeding ten days, when such coach is occupied by persons employed in the
operation of a temporary recreational, amusement or civic activity. Such
temporary parking, use and occupancy of a trailer coach shall be permitted only
when the coach is parked on the same premises on which the activity is located
and only when adequate sanitary facilities are available upon the premises for
the use of the occupants of the trailer coach.
      (2)   A permit shall be required for all trailers now parked outside
trailer parks. The permit shall be obtained from the building inspector 60 days
after the passage of this chapter; application for a permit shall be
accompanied by the payment of a fee of $15, which shall cover a period of three
months from and after the granting of the permit. A fee of $15 in advance for
each three months period or part thereof shall be payable thereafter.
Application for the outside of trailer park permit shall contain a statement of
the nature and location of the sanitary facilities; a statement that all waste
water from the trailer coach shall be emptied in the proper sewer fixtures; and
the written consent to the location of such trailer coach from any other
occupants of the premises upon which such trailer coach is parked. Such permits
shall terminate and become void and of no effect upon failure of the trailer
coach occupant to pay the fees hereinabove provided for, or upon damage to such
trailer coach by fire, explosion, or any other cause to the extent of 25% of
the market value of such trailer coach, or upon the moving of such trailer
coach off of the tract of ground upon which it was located at the time the
permit granted. The permit herein provided for is not transferable and in the
event the present occupant moves from the trailer coach, the permit shall
terminate and no permit shall be issued on the trailer coach for a new
occupant, once a permit terminates and becomes void. The Building Inspector
shall not issue a new permit on the same trailer coach for occupancy outside a
licensed trailer park.
('68 Code, § 27½-3) (Ord. passed 4-8-69)
§ 152.04 BUILDING PERMIT; STANDARDS TO BE MET.
   (A)   No person shall erect or construct, or proceed with the erection or
construction of any trailer site, building or structure, nor to add to,
enlarge, improve, alter, repair, convert, extend or demolish any trailer site,
building or structure or any part thereof, or install any plumbing, electrical
or mechanical equipment as a part of the site, building or structure, or make
any other improvements to any site, building or structure or cause the same to
be done within the trailer park as defined in §
152.01 without first obtaining a building permit from the Building Inspector.
   (B)   The Building Inspector shall not issue a permit with reference to any
building or structure unless the fee for issuing such permit is paid, and the
following minimum building standards are met:
      (1)   Each cottage shall have not less than one bedroom the dimensions of
which shall not be less than nine feet by nine feet in area with a ceiling
height of not less than seven feet.
      (2)   Each cottage shall have hot and cold running water, a toilet, and a
tub or shower bath.
      (3)   If not air-conditioned, the window openings in each cottage shall
be fully screened with a screen wire or its equivalent and shall not be less
than 16 mesh per inch, and doors shall be likewise screened or otherwise
protected.
      (4)   Each cottage shall adjoin a road or driveway and shall be so
located and constructed as to provide satisfactory fire protection separation
in compliance with the building code of the city adopted in
Chapter 150.
      (5)   The placing or storage of unsightly materials or objects of
whatever nature on or about the premises shall be unlawful.
('68 Code, § 27½-4) (Ord. passed 4-8-69)
§ 152.05 SEWAGE AND REFUSE DISPOSAL.
   Liquid and other wastes from showers, iceboxes, lavatories, toilets,
bathtubs, slop sinks and other plumbing fixtures in trailer coaches or cottages
shall be emptied into the city sewer system, or in the event the city system is
not within 200 feet of the trailer park, such refuse shall be deposited in a
private sewer or disposal plant or septic tank system adequate for the purpose,
all in accordance with the valid provisions of this code of ordinances or any
other applicable ordinance of the city.
('68 Code, § 27½-11) (Ord. passed 4-8-69)
Cross-reference:
   Water and sewers, see
Ch. 51
§ 152.06 WASTE AND GARBAGE DISPOSAL.
   Each trailer park shall be provided with supervision and equipment
sufficient to prevent covering and littering the ground with garbage, rubbish,
waste and debris, and each trailer park shall be provided with safe and
adequate provision for the collection or removal of wastes and garbage,
complying with all sanitary ordinances of the city and approved by the city
health officer. No garbage shall be burned in or on any part of such trailer
park, and it shall be unlawful for anyone' to empty, pour, drop, spill, throw
or drain waste water, excreta, or other garbage or refuse on, over or upon the
surface of any trailer park.
('68 Code, § 27½-12) (Ord. passed 4-8-69)
TRAILER PARK LICENSE
§ 152.15 REQUIRED; FEE; DISPLAY.
   (A)   Required, duration. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish,
maintain, conduct or operate any present or future trailer park within the city
limits of the city without first having obtained a license therefor from the
Building Inspector of the city. Such license shall be for the calendar year or
any part thereof, ending December 31 of each year.
   (B)   Fee.
      (1)   The annual license fee for each license or renewal thereof to
operate a trailer park shall be a minimum of $50 and an additional $10 for each
trailer coach site or cottage over and above five such sites or cottages, or a
combination thereof.
      (2)   Such fee shall be paid to the Building Inspector by the applicant
at the time he files his application for such license or renewal. If such
license is issued during any calendar year the fee therefor shall be prorated
with the understanding that the money during which such license is issued shall
be counted as a full month. Should the license be refused, the license fee
shall be retained by the city to compensate it for the expense of the
inspections hereinafter provided for. The license issued hereunder shall not be
transferred to any other person or location.
   (C)   Displaying. License for the trailer parks must be conspicuously
displayed at such parks at all times.
('68 Code, § 27½-5) (Ord. passed 4-8-69)
§ 152.16 APPLICATION.
   (A)   To whom made, information. Application for a license to operate a
trailer park, or renewal thereof, shall be made to the Building Inspector of
the city on a form to be furnished by such official. Such application shall
state the name and address of the person desiring to engage in such business,
and if the applicant be a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners
composing the same, and a description of the property, including street
address, of the premises where such trailer park is to be operated so that it
can be easily identified. It shall also give the name of the owner of such
premises, and such other and further information as may be required by the
city.
   (B)   Agreement as to manager, responsibility for violations. Any applicant
for a license to operate a trailer park shall agree in his application that
some responsible adult person or persons will be in charge of the trailer park
and available on the premises at all times.
('68 Code, § 27½-6) (Ord. passed 4-8-69)
§ 152.17 SECURING IN ANNEXED AREAS.
   The owners of trailer parks, which may hereafter become subject to the
provisions of this chapter through annexation, shall be permitted 60 days in
which to apply for a trailer park license; provided, however, that in the event
such license application is denied, such owner shall be permitted to operate
such trailer park if he appeals the refusal of the Building Inspector to the
City Council, but upon final refusal by the City Council, to issue him a
license, such right to operate such trailer park shall terminate.
('68 Code, § 27½-7) (Ord. passed 4-8-69)
§ 152.18 REVOCATION, SUSPENSION.
   The City Health Officer, or any of his inspectors, the Building Inspector or
any of his inspectors, the Chief of Police, the Fire Marshal, any of their
agents or representatives, or any other authorized employee of the city, shall
have the right and authority to enter upon the trailer parks at all reasonable
times for the purpose of inspecting same, and to see that no legal violations
are being made. If the licensee violates any of the provisions of this chapter,
or if upon the aforesaid inspection it shall be found that the licensee or any
of his agents, representatives or employees are violating any provisions of
this chapter, or any other provision of this code, any ordinance of the city or
the laws of the state, such violations shall be reported to the Building
Inspector and upon receipt thereof such officer shall have the right, power and
authority to revoke, or suspend, for any period of time, any license or renewal
thereof issued hereunder, after written notice to the licensee and proper
hearing concerning the matter.
('68 Code, § 27½-8) (Ord. passed 4-8-69)
§ 152.19 APPEALS.
   (A)   The Building Inspector shall, upon refusing to issue a trailer park
license or a renewal thereof, or upon revoking or suspending any such license,
notify in writing the licensee of the reasons therefor. In such case, licensee
shall have the right to appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustments and Appeals
by notifying in writing the Building Inspector of his desire to exercise his
right to appeal within ten days after the decision of the Building Inspector.
Upon such appeal the Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall conduct a hearing
at which time evidence may be introduced concerning the action appealed from,
and after such hearing the Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall announce its
decision by and through a Board motion. The action of the Board on such appeal
shall be subject to action by the City Council, whose decision shall be final.
   (B)   All persons operating a trailer park at the time such license or a
renewal thereof is refused, revoked or suspended, who exercise their right of
appeal as provided in division (A) of this section, shall have the right to
continue operating such trailer park pending final action on such appeal.
('68 Code, § 27½-9) (Ord. passed 4-8-69)
§ 152.20 ISSUANCE NOT A BAR TO CITY'S POWERS.
   No license granted hereunder shall ever be held to bar prosecution for
violation of any other provisions of this code or any other ordinance of the
city, or to prevent the enforcement of any such code provision or ordinance or
inhibit the exercise of powers and duties of any officer under the terms of any
such code provision or ordinance.
('68 Code, § 27½-10) (Ord. passed 4-8-69)
§ 152.21 INSPECTION REQUIRED PRIOR TO ISSUING LICENSE.
   Upon receipt by the Building Inspector of the application fora trailer park
license or a renewal thereof, such officer or his duly authorized
representative shall enter upon the premises described in such application and
inspect same for the purpose of ascertaining that the provisions of this
chapter and any and all other ordinances of the city and the laws and statutes
of the state have been and are being complied with by such applicant. Upon
being satisfied that the applicant is complying with all the requirements as
set forth above, the Building Inspector shall issue a license to the applicant
to operate the trailer park applied for, provided the license fees described
herein have been fully paid and the improvements to such trailer park have been
made in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter. Should such
application be refused, then the applicant shall, within ten days thereafter,
be notified in writing by the Building Inspector of the reasons for the
refusal, and he shall have the right to appeal such decision as herein
provided.
('68 Code, § 27½-13) (Ord. passed 4-8-69)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the sections of
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be
fined not less than $1 nor more than $500. Each day upon which there is
violation of any section of this chapter shall be separate offense.
('68 Code, § 27½-15) (Ord. passed 4-8-69; Am. Ord. 7-1991-21, passed 7-25-91)
CHAPTER 153: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Section
   
153.01   Created; composition
   
153.02   Appointment and terms of members; vacancies
   
153.03   Members to serve without compensation
   
153.04   Removal of members
   
153.05   Attendance
   
153.06   Quorum
   
153.07   Appointment of officers and adoption of rules; required bylaws
   
153.08   Meetings
   
153.09   Duties
   
153.10   Employment of specialists
§ 153.01 CREATED; COMPOSITION.
   There is created and established for the city the Planning and Zoning
Commission, which shall be composed of seven members to be appointed by the
City Council. Each members shall be a resident citizen, taxpayer and qualified
voter of the city at the time of his or her appointment.
('68 Code, § 2-63) (Am. Ord. passed 8-10-71; Am. Ord. 11-1975-42, passed 11-28-
75; Am. Ord. 10-2001-75, passed 10-9-01)
Cross-reference:
   Subdivisions, see
Ch. 154
   Zoning, see
Ch. 155
Statutory reference:
   Authority of home rule cities to create a Zoning Commission and to establish
Zoning Regulations, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 1175(26)
§ 153.02 APPOINTMENT AND TERMS OF MEMBERS; VACANCIES.
   Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be appointed by the City
Council for a two-year term. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
terms in the same manner as provided for the original appointments. All expired
terms shall be filled for terms as provided for the original appointments and
in the same manner. A member of the Commission ceasing to reside in the city or
filing for public office during his or her term of office shall immediately
forfeit his or her office.
('68 Code, § 2-64) (Am. Ord. 10-2001-75, passed 10-9-01)
§ 153.03 MEMBERS TO SERVE WITHOUT COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve without
compensation.
('68 Code, § 2-65) (Am. Ord. 10-2001-75, passed 10-9-01)
§ 153.04 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
   Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be removed by the City
Council after public hearing and for cause assigned in writing. If a vacancy
should exist in the Planning and Zoning Commission membership due to removal
from office, resignation, death, refusal or inability to serve, the City
Council shall appoint a new member to fill the vacancy.
('68 Code, § 2-66) (Am. Ord. 10-2001-75, passed 10-9-01)
§ 153.05 ATTENDANCE.
   The City Council may remove a member from the Planning and Zoning Commission
who misses three consecutive meetings.
(Ord. 10-2001-75, passed 10-9-01)
§ 153.06 QUORUM.
   Any four members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
The affirmative vote of a majority of those attending any meeting at which
there is a quorum present shall be necessary to pass any motion, recommendation
or resolution of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Am. Ord. 10-2001-75, passed 10-9-01)
§ 153.07 APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS AND ADOPTION OF RULES; REQUIRED BYLAWS.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice-
Chairperson from its membership. The Chairperson shall preside over all
meetings of the Commission. The Vice-Chairperson shall perform the duties of
the Chairperson in his or her absence or inability to act. The Commission shall
also have the power to make rules, regulations and bylaws for its own
government, which shall conform as nearly as possible with those governing the
City Council, and which shall be subject to approval of the Council. Such
bylaws shall include, among other items, provisions for:
   (A)   Regular and special meetings, open to the public.
   (B)   Records of its proceedings, to be open for inspection by the public.
   (C)   Reporting to the governing body and the public, from time to time and
annually.
   (D)   The holding of public hearings on its recommendation.
('68 Code, § 2-67) (Am. Ord. 10-2001-75, passed 10-9-01)
§ 153.08 MEETINGS.
   All meetings to the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be open to the
public. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote
of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating
such fact, and shall keep record of its examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the Planning
Administrator and shall be a public record. The Planning Administrator of the
city shall be the custodian and possessor of the records and minutes of the
Planning and Zoning Commission. Meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission
may be held as often as necessary to conduct the business coming before the
Commission and shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other
times as the Commission may determine.
(Ord. 10-2001-75, passed 10-9-01)
§ 153.09 DUTIES.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, from time to time, either at
its discretion or as requested by the City Council submit its reports, plans
and recommendations for the orderly growth, development and welfare of the
city. The Commission shall have power and it shall be its duty to prepare a
comprehensive plan and ordinance for zoning the city in accordance with Chapter
283, Acts of the Regular Session of the Legislature, 1927, being Tex. Loc.
Gov't Code §§ 211.001 et seq.
   (B)   The Commission shall also perform other duties as may be prescribed by
ordinance or state law, or as follows.
      (1)   To make and recommend for adoption a master plan, as a whole or in
parts, for the future development of the municipality and its environs; and
      (2)   To recommend the boundaries of the various districts and
appropriate regulations to be enforced therein under this chapter, the
ordinances of the city, or the laws of the state; and
      (3)   To recommend approval or denial of zoning changes and regulations
under this chapter, the ordinances of the city, or the laws of the state; and
      (4)   To hear, recommend, or determine any matter relating to zoning,
planning or subdivision control as may be specified or required under this
chapter, the ordinances of the city, or the laws of the state; and
      (5)   To exercise such duties and powers as may be now or hereafter
conferred by this chapter, the ordinances of the city, or applicable laws of
the state; and
      (6)   To recommend to the City Council amendments to the city's zoning
ordinances which it deems necessary to clarify the classification of any use,
new or otherwise not listed or identified within this chapter, for the purpose
of establishing the appropriate zoning district into which such use should be
placed; and
      (7)   To interpret the intent of the official zoning map where
uncertainty exists because the physical features on the ground vary from those
on the official zoning map and none of the rules set forth in this chapter
apply; and
      (8)   Upon request by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, to recommend
to the City Council amendments to the city's zoning ordinances which it deems
necessary to clarify the intent or meaning of the provision of this chapter
where uncertainty exists regarding the interpretation of such provision.
('68 Code, § 2-68) (Am. Ord. 10-2001-75, passed 10-9-01)
§ 153.10 EMPLOYMENT OF SPECIALISTS.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have power to employ such qualified
persons as may be necessary for the proper conduct and undertakings of the
Commission and to pay for their services and such other necessary expenses,
provided that the cost of such services and expenses shall not exceed the
amount appropriated by the City Council for the use of the Commission.
('68 Code, § 2-69) (Am. Ord. 10-2001-75, passed 10-9-01)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Short title
   
154.002   Authority
   
154.003   Purpose
   
154.004   Definitions
   
154.005   Sequence of events
   
154.006   Exceptions to sequence — flowchart
   
154.007   Filing fee schedule
   
154.008   Modification or variance of platting standards
   
154.009   Withholding of improvements
   
154.010   Appeal to City Council
Platting Procedures
   
154.020   General procedures
   
154.021   Pre-application conference
   
154.022   Preliminary plats — procedures for approval
   
154.023   Preliminary plats — data requirements
   
154.024   Final plats — procedure for approval
   
154.025   Final plats — data requirements
   
154.026   Replatting procedures; replats and plat revisions
   
154.027   Procedures for minor plats
   
154.028   Rough proportionality
   
154.029   Amending plats
   
154.030   Conveyance plats
Minimum Platting Design Standards
   
154.040   Conformity required
   
154.041   Street standards
   
154.042   Alley standards
   
154.043   Block standards
   
154.044   Lot standards
   
154.045   Easement standards
   
154.046   Special commercial and industrial subdivision standards
   
154.047   Park facilities
General Requirements
   
154.060   Construction authorization
   
154.061   Inspections
   
154.062   Acceptance of community facilities
   
154.063   City-developer joint participation
   
154.064   (Reserved)
   
154.065   Escrow funds
   
154.066   Assessment paving policy
   
154.067   Survey requirements
   
154.068   Impact fees
Street and Right-of-Way Requirements
   
154.080   Street and right-of-way design criteria
   
154.081   Final engineering plans requirements
   
154.082   Construction requirements
   
154.083   Distribution of costs
   
154.084   Sidewalk requirements
   
154.085   Street name and traffic signs
   
154.086   Street lighting requirements
   
154.087   Assigned street block and house numbers
   
154.088   Driveway requirements
   
154.089   Off-site street construction or improvement
   
154.090   Private streets
Water and Sanitary Sewer Requirements
   
154.100   Water and sanitary sewer design criteria
   
154.101   (Reserved)
   
154.102   Sewer installation policy
   
154.103   (Reserved)
   
154.104   (Reserved)
   
154.105   Single-customer charges for city water/sewer main connections
   
154.106   Ownership and maintenance
   
154.107   (Reserved)
Drainage Standards
   
154.120   Purpose
   
154.121   Installation of stormwater facilities policy
   
154.122   General requirements
   
154.123   Drainage features and policies
   
154.124   General design requirements
   
154.125   Construction
   
154.126   Off-site drainage
 
   
154.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Adopt plats and zone property, see Charter §
3.10(F)
   Building regulations and codes, see
Ch. 150
   Planning and zoning commission, see §§
153.01 et seq.
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 99
   Zoning, see
Ch. 155
Statutory reference:
   Subdivision regulations, Tex. Loc. Gov't Code §§ 212.001 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Subdivision and
Development Standards Ordinance of Cleburne, Texas.”
('68 Code, App. B, § 1.01) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.002 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and Laws of
the State of Texas, including Chapter 212, “Municipal Regulation of
Subdivisions and Property Development,” Local Government Code, being Tex. Loc.
Gov't Code §§ 212.001 et seq., as heretofore or hereafter amended.
('68 Code, App. B, § 1.02) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.003 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly, safe and
healthful development of the area within the city and to promote the health,
safety, morals, and general welfare of the community. Hereafter every owner or
subdivider of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits of the
city or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city who may seek to
subdivide the same into two or more parts for the purpose of creating a
building lot or lots or for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of the
city or any additions thereto shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.
('68 Code, App. B, § 1.03) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCEPTANCE OF COMMUNITY FACILITIES. The written notification from the City
Engineer to the developer which constitutes the city's acceptance for the
ownership and maintenance of the community facilities or public improvements
after the facilities are constructed and approved. The acceptance shall not
constitute a waiver of any warranties for materials or workmanship either
expressed or implied.
   ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNER. The owner of the property that shares a property
line with the subject property or abuts the opposite side of a right-of-way.
   ALLEY. See UNOPENED STREET.
   APPROACH MAINS.
      (1)   Water. The off-site main required to connect a development to a
source of ample supply. It shall be not less than eight inches in diameter and
of a size large enough to serve both the development for which service is
requested and adjoining areas, as determined by the City Engineer.
      (2)   Sewer. The sanitary sewer required by the City Engineer to serve
the entire drainage area in which it is constructed, both inside and outside of
a developer's property, under ultimate development conditions, to connect
sanitary sewer facilities in the development to the city's sanitary sewerage
system.
   AS-BUILT PLANS. Plans of record that include any significant changes that
occurred during construction from the plans as they were originally approved by
the City Engineer.
   BOUNDARY FACILITY SERVICE CONNECTIONS. Service connections located outside
the development for which the approach main or boundary facility is
constructed, and connected directly to the approach main or boundary facility.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Official holds senior level responsibility
for coordinating and controlling building inspection activities to meet all the
provisions of this code and any other ordinance of the city regarding
structural, electrical, plumbing and zoning regulations. The BUILDING OFFICIAL
is charged with the responsibility of issuing building permits and certificates
of occupancy in conformance with the code of ordinances and any other ordinance
and policy of the city.
   CITY. The city together with its governing body, duly authorized boards,
agents, officials and employees.
   CITY ENGINEER. That person or group of persons or consultants or any
employee thereof that has been appointed as City Engineer, or his or her duly
authorized representative. The CITY ENGINEER shall be responsible for approving
all phases of engineering plans, specifications, profiles, and design criteria
for the installation and development of all community facilities in the city.
The CITY ENGINEER shall be responsible for issuing a letter of satisfaction and
acceptance of the community facilities upon final inspection.
   CITY REQUIREMENTS. The design and construction standards, code provisions,
ordinances, policies, approved plans and specifications, profiles, grades,
lines and agreements as required for the construction of community facilities.
   CITY SECRETARY. That person appointed by the City Council under the
authority of the city charter and includes any deputies appointed by the City
Council to fulfill a given duty or function in the absence of the CITY
SECRETARY.
   COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT. This designation shall apply to all properties,
other than residentially zoned properties, which require extensions of
community facilities due to new construction or expansion of existing
improvements on the property.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment other than a one- or two-unit
residence.
   COMMERCIAL PROPERTY. Any property of zonings not included in the definition
of "residential property."
   COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission, used interchangeably.
   COMMUNITY FACILITIES. Any facility which is to be used by or benefits the
public and dedicated to the city for the public's use to include, but not
limited to, water mains, sewer mains, streets, alley, curbs, gutters, and storm
drains.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The comprehensive plan of the city and adjoining areas
adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council,
including all its revisions. The plan indicates the general locations
recommended for various land uses, transportation routes, streets, parks and
other public and private developments and improvements.
   CONTRACTOR. The person, persons, firm or corporation, which is or will be
engaged in the actual construction, building, laying, rebuilding or repairing
of streets, alleys, thoroughfares, curbs, gutters, sewer mains, water mains,
and/or any community facility.
   DEDICATED STREET or ALLEY. Any street or alley for which the right-of-way
has become public property through platting, deed, or public usage as defined
by law.
   DESIGN ENGINEERING. Consisting of all necessary studies, tests, preliminary
plans, and the like necessary for the preparation of complete plans,
specifications and contract documents meeting the approval of the city.
   DEVELOPER. A person, firm, corporation or other legal entity, or his or her
designee undertaking construction of private or public improvements to
property. This includes any facilities which will be dedicated to the public or
any private construction which requires a building permit.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The designated city official, under the
supervision of the City Manager, carrying the title of Director of Public Works
and charged with enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The DIRECTOR OF
PUBLIC WORKS or his or her designated representative shall be responsible for
enforcing the rules, regulations, standards, specifications for the
construction and installation of all community facilities, including those
related provisions contained in the subdivision ordinance and the community
facilities policy.
   DRIVEWAY. That portion of a parking lot, private road, or private access
that consists of a travel lane opening onto a public street.
   DWELLING UNIT. That area set aside for single-family living. A single-family
residence would be one DWELLING UNIT; a duplex would be two DWELLING UNITS; and
each apartment of an apartment house complex would be a separate DWELLING UNIT.
   EASEMENT. The right to use property of another for a specific purpose, such
as the rights of access of an individual, the public or a franchise agent of
the city, or a private access easement to another property owner, but shall not
include fee title to lands. The intended use of all easements shall be
designated on the plat.
   ENGINEER. A person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas
Engineering Registration Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice
as a registered professional engineer.
   ENGINEERING PLANS or CONSTRUCTION PLANS. A graphic depiction of the proposed
facilities designed by an engineer which shows in detail and to scale
sufficient information so that the facility can be constructed according to the
design. The plans shall be drawn according to conventional drafting practices.
Each page of the plans shall be stamped by an engineer.
   EXISTING DEVELOPED RESIDENTIAL AREA. This designation shall apply to defined
areas in which at least 51% of the lots of record already have existing
improvements and in which a community facility is required for the benefit of
the area as a whole.
   EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION. The unincorporated area which is contiguous
to the corporate limits of the city, and not a part of any other city, as
established under "Extraterritorial Jurisdiction of Municipalities," being Tex.
Loc. Gov't Code Chapter 42, as heretofore or hereafter amended.
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOODPLAIN, 100-YEAR. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source at a frequency of more than once per 100 years, as determined
by the most recently adopted flood insurance rate map produced by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a watercourse and portions of the adjoining
floodplain which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regulatory
flood, as determined by the most recently adopted floodway flood boundary and
floodway map produced by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   LOT. An undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street
and which is, or in the future may be improved, offered for sale, conveyed, or
transferred; which is designated as a distinct and separate tract, and which is
identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision
plat which has been properly filed of record.
   OFFICIAL CITY OF CLEBURNE MAP. The map of the city adopted by City Council
on February 12, 1957. This map should only be used to determine if platting is
required under §§
154.020 et seq.
   ON-SITE MAINS.
      (1)   Water. An on-site water main is one that provides service within a
development or subdivision.
      (2)   Sewer. An on-site sanitary sewer main is one designed to serve the
entire stormwater area in which it is to be constructed, both inside and
upstream from all or part of the developer's property, under ultimate
development conditions, but which is located entirely within the limits of the
development.
   OPEN STREET or ALLEY. Any street or alley for which the right-of-way has
become public property through platting, deed, or public usage as defined by
law, and is presently being used.
   PARKWAY. That portion of a street right-of-way that is between the edge of
the street and the property line.
   PLANNING AND ZONING COORDINATOR. That person appointed by the Public Works
Director under the authority of the city charter and city ordinances.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission.
   PLAT. A drawing prepared by a surveyor which shall accurately describe all
of the subdivision or addition by metes and bounds and locate the same with
respect to the nearest monument of record, giving  the dimensions thereof of
the subdivision or addition, and dimensions of all streets, alleys, squares,
parks or other portions of same intended to be dedicated to public use, or for
the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto.
      (1)   APPROVED PLAT. A plat that has been approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and/or the City Council.
      (2)   PRELIMINARY PLAT. The plat of any lot, tract, or parcel of land
that is not to be recorded of record, but is only a proposed division of land
for review and study by the city.
      (3)   FINAL PLAT. The final plat shall be any approved plat of any lot,
lots, tract, or parcel of land requested to be recorded in the records of the
Johnson County Courthouse.
      (4)   REPLAT. The rearrangement of any part or all of any lot, lots,
block or blocks of a previously platted subdivision, addition, lot or tract in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and state statute.
   REFUNDABLE APPROACH MAIN. An approach main, either sewer or water, that is
paid for by the developer, and a special contract agreement has been signed
between the developer and the city stating the conditions of the refund to the
developer when another user connects to the approach main.
   REGULATORY (100-YEAR) FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods
known to have occurred generally in the area and reasonably characteristic of
what can be expected to occur on a particular stream. The REGULATORY FLOOD
generally occurs once approximately every 100 years as determined from an
analysis of floods on a particular stream and other streams in the same general
region.
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. Any platted residential property along a street
where the greater portion of the property footage between two intersecting
streets is owned by the individual or firm developing all or any part of the
lots, or any residential platting.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Property zoned for single-family or two-family
residential use.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special use.
The usage of the term RIGHT-OF-WAY for land platting purposes shall mean that
every right-of-way hereafter established as shown on a final plat is to be
separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and
not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. RIGHTS-OF-
WAY intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm
drains, or any other uses involving maintenance by a public agency shall be
dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is
established.
   SCHEMATIC DRAWING. A single line sketch showing the approximate locations of
existing and proposed facilities (water, sanitary sewer, open and closed storm
sewer, streets and the like) without the benefit of detail drafting.
   SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
      (1)   Water. The connection between a water main and the water meter
through which a given property is supplied with water.
      (2)   Sewer. That portion of the house sewer located in the roadway of a
public street between the main or lateral sanitary sewer in such street and a
point approximately three feet behind the curbline of such public street
nearest to the site to be served, or to that portion of the house sewer located
in a public alley, or to the tap installed for connection to a sanitary sewer
located in the parkway of a public street or in an easement.
   SIDE LOT. Residential property abutting two streets at their intersection,
with the longer street frontage being the side of the lot.
   SINGLE CUSTOMER. An existing occupied residential establishment or an
existing commercial establishment not presently connected to the city's water
and/or sanitary sewerage systems.
   SKETCH PLAN. A concept or rough layout of the proposed development plans for
use in the preapplication conference to be submitted by the developer or
subdivider at a size and scale of his or her own discretion.
   STREET. A public way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street,
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, land,
private place, or however otherwise designated (see also UNOPENED STREET). The
following are types of STREETS:
      (1)   ACCESS ROAD. A road or street that provides access to adjacent
properties along a freeway or limited access thoroughfare.
      (2)   BORDER STREET. A street which divides properties under separate
ownership.
      (3)   COLLECTOR STREET. A street which is continuous through one or more
residential districts and is intended as a connecting street between
residential districts and arterial streets.
      (4)   CUL-DE-SAC. A street which terminates at one end with a turn-
around.
      (5)   FREEWAY or EXPRESSWAY. A highway designed for movement of large
volumes of traffic between areas and around and across the city and which does
not provide access directly to adjacent land.
      (6)   LOCAL STREET. A street which is intended primarily to serve traffic
within a neighborhood or limited residential district, and which is not
necessarily continuous through several residential districts.
      (7)   OFF-SITE STREET. A street providing access from a subdivision to a
collector or major thoroughfare.
      (8)   PERIMETER STREET. Existing street adjacent to the property line.
      (9)   RESIDENTIAL STREET. See LOCAL STREET.
      (10)   THOROUGHFARE (MAJOR STREET). Principal traffic thoroughfares more
or less continuous across the city, which are intended to connect remote parts
of the city or areas adjacent thereto, and act as principal connecting streets
with state and federal highways. MAJOR STREETS are designated on the
thoroughfare plan of the city as minor arterial and principal arterial streets.
      (11)   INDUSTRIAL OR COMMERCIAL STREET. A street intended primarily to
serve traffic within an area of industrial or commercial development.
INDUSTRIAL OR COMMERCIAL STREETS shall be designed and built to the equivalent
of a collector street.
      (12)   LEGACY ROAD. An existing street within the Legacy Road Overlay, as
established in the Master Thoroughfare Plan, which has a volume of less than
2,000 vehicles per day, serves a developed, mostly residential area, and has an
existing right-of-way of less than 50 feet.
   STREET CONSTRUCTION, NEW. Paving a street that has not previously been
paved, or which has been surfaced, but which is not to city specification.
   STREET RECONSTRUCTION. Widening and/or reconstruction of an existing street
which has an existing surface on city grade.
   SUBDIVIDER. A person, firm, corporation or other legal entity undertaking
the subdividing or the resubdividing of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two
or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for the purpose of
transfer of ownership or development, whether immediate or future.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of any tract of land situated within the corporate
limits, or within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, into two or more
parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of any tract of land or any
addition to the city or for laying out suburban lots or building lots, or any
lots and streets, alleys or parts or other portions intended for public use or
the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto,
for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development, whether immediate or
future. SUBDIVISION includes resubdivision, but it does not include the
division of land for agricultural purposes into parcels or tracts of ten acres
or more which does not involve the creation of any new street, alley, or
easement or access or building sites.
   SURVEYOR. A registered public surveyor as authorized by the state statutes
to practice the profession of surveying.
   UNOPENED STREET or ALLEY. Any dedicated street or alley which is not being
used by vehicular traffic.
   USGS. United States Geodetic Survey.
('68 Code, App. B, § 1.04) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. 04-2022-40,
passed 4-26-22)
§ 154.005 SEQUENCE OF EVENTS.
   The following sequence (i.e., "steps") of events is required for all
subdividing and land development. Refer to §
154.006 for phases which may be skipped.
Step            Requirement
1.   The developer and staff hold a preapplication conference (§
154.020).
2.   The developer submits preliminary plat along with the application and
filing fee (§
154.022).
3.   The development review committee (DRC) reviews the preliminary plat.
4.   The developer may incorporate DRC comments into preliminary plat and
resubmit prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission (P&Z) meeting.
5.   The preliminary plat is approved by P&Z. If approved with conditions or
disapproved, P&Z shall provide the developer a written statement of the
condition or reasons for disapproval.
6.   The developer may submit a written response to the P&Z that satisfies each
condition or remedies each reason for disapproval. P&Z shall then determine
whether to approve or disapprove the preliminary plat.
7.   The preliminary plat is approved by City Council. If approved with
conditions or disapproved the City Council shall provide the developer a
written statement of the conditions or reasons for disapproval.
8.   The developer may submit a written response to the City Council that
satisfies each condition or remedies each reason for disapproval. The City
Council shall then determine whether to approve or disapprove the preliminary
plat.
9.   The preliminary plat is filed in the Planning and Zoning Coordinator's
office for a period of 12 months (§
154.022(O)).
10.   The City Engineer approves the engineering plans and specifications for
the entire final plat (§§
154.060;
154.081). If disapproved, the plans and specifications shall be corrected and
resubmitted. In the alternative, the City Engineer may issue a letter stating
that engineering plans and specifications are not needed for the subdivision.
11.   The developer submits a final plat on a portion of the preliminary plat
along with the application and filing fee (§
154.024).
12.   The DRC reviews the final plat.
13.   The developer may incorporate DRC comments into the final plat and
resubmit prior to the P&Z meeting.
14.   The P&Z approves the final plat. If approved with conditions or
disapproved, P&Z shall provide the developer a written statement of the
conditions or reasons for disapproval.
15.   The developer may submit a written response to the P&Z that satisfies
each condition or remedies each reason for disapproval. P&Z shall then
determine whether to approve or disapprove the final plat.
16.   The City Council approves the final plat. If approved with conditions or
disapproved the City Council shall provide the developer a written statement of
the conditions or reasons for disapproval.
17.   The developer may submit a written response to the City Council that
satisfies each condition or remedies each reason for disapproval. The City
Council shall then determine whether to approve or disapprove the final plat.
18.   If public infrastructure is required, the developer submits the required
bonds, insurance documents, engineering estimates, inspection fee and a copy of
the construction contract(s) for all phases of the construction on the
engineering plans to include excavation, the placement of underground utilities
and storm drainage, street improvements, and the developer and contractor(s)
attend a mandatory preconstruction conference (§
154.060).
19.   The city files the plat in the plat records at the County Clerk's office
of the Johnson County Courthouse.
20.   City Engineer authorizes the start of construction for excavation and
fill, utility construction, street construction, and construction of all other
community facilities.
21.   The construction of all required community facilities is completed and
accepted by the City Engineer.
22.   Building permits may be issued upon request.
('68 Code, App. B, § 1.05) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. 08-2019-47,
passed 8-27-19)
§ 154.006 EXCEPTIONS TO SEQUENCE — FLOWCHART.
   The following flowchart permits skipping nonpertinent phases of the
subdividing and land development sequence of events set forth in §
154.005.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7674.png]
 
('68 Code, App. B, § 1.06) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. 08-2019-47,
passed 8-27-19)
§ 154.007 FILING FEE SCHEDULE.
   The following filing fees will be collected by the city when the application
is submitted for property inside the corporate limits and in the
extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) area:
   (A)   Preliminary plat applications shall be $250 plus the following:
      Number of Acres in Subdivision      Fee per Acre
      5 or less                     $ 5.00
      6 to 10                     4.00
      11 to 50                     3.60
      51 to 150                     2.90
      151 or more                     2.30
   (B)   Final plat applications shall be $250, plus the following:
      Number of Lots in Subdivision         Fee per Lot
      10 or less                     $ 3.50
      11 to 50                     2.80
      51 to 150                     2.25
      151 or 500                     1.80
      501 or more                     1.45
   (C)   Replat applications shall be $250 plus $10 per lot.
   (D)   Minor plats shall be $250.
   (E)   Conveyance plats shall be $250.
   (F)   Applications for a change in the master thoroughfare plan shall be
$150.
('68 Code, App. B, § 1.07) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. 6-1996-24,
passed 6-11-96; Am. Ord. 9-2002-64, passed 9-10-02; Am. Ord. 01-2023-03, passed
1-24-23)
§ 154.008 MODIFICATION OR VARIANCE OF PLATTING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Where existing conditions require a modification of the standards and
regulations herein contained because of a distinct and unusual condition that
does not prevail on other undeveloped land generally in the city, the
Commission may approve a variance from specific standards to permit the
equitable treatment of the land or tract in light of the unusual condition.
   (B)   In granting variances and modifications, the Commission may require
such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives
of the standards or requirements so varied or modified and maintain the spirit
and intent of the standards herein set forth.
('68 Code, App. B, § 8.01) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.009 WITHHOLDING OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The city shall withhold all city improvements of whatsoever nature,
including the furnishing of sewerage facilities and water service, and all
franchise services under control of the city from all additions which have not
been approved in accordance with the regulations contained in this chapter.
   (B)   A building permit will be issued after completion and acceptance by
the city of water and sewer, stormwater drainage or detention facilities, and
installation of streets, curbs and gutters; an exception from this requirement
can be given by the city only under the following circumstances:
      (1)   All improvements with the exception of street improvements, have
been installed and accepted; and
      (2)   The developer has placed in escrow 110% of the engineer's cost
estimate for street improvements, or given a letter of credit for that amount,
for the city to complete the remaining work, in the event the developer fails
to complete the construction. The city will refund all escrow money to the
developer within 30 days with accrued interest after the developer completes
the work and it is accepted by the city. If the city must complete the work,
then the city will retain the full escrow amount plus interest; or
      (3)   (a)   When an interlocal cooperation agreement has been executed
between the city and another governmental entity pursuant to the provisions of
Tex. Gov't Code §§ 291.001 et seq., and the parties agree to be bound by the
terms of such agreement.
         (b)   In instances where the developer has met the full requirements
for placing adequate funds in escrow thereby guaranteeing the completion of
those public facilities, building permits may be issued within the final plat
area. Certificates of occupancy and/or final inspections will not be allowed
until said public facilities are completed and accepted by the City Engineer.
('68 Code, App. B, § 8.02) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. 12-1989-52,
passed 11-30-89)
§ 154.010 APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL.
   Any subdivider aggrieved by any finding or action of the commission, which
involves the jurisdiction of the City Council, which is herein defined as
dedication of, or improvements to, streets, or installation of other public
improvements, shall appeal in writing to the City Council within 30 days from
the date of such finding or action and not thereafter. Appeals of other actions
by the Commission shall be to courts of appropriate jurisdiction.
('68 Code, App. B, § 8.03) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
PLATTING PROCEDURES
§ 154.020 GENERAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Intent. A preliminary plat is intended to show how the owner/developer
plans to lay out lots, streets, easements, and open space, and to gain
concurrence from the city that the proposed subdivision meets all applicable
subdivision and zoning regulations prior to the preparation of a final plat.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   A preliminary plat is required when any unplatted property is
intended to be subdivided, unless the development meets the criteria for a
waiver of the requirement of this chapter as listed in division (B)(3) below.
      (2)   The preliminary plat shall include all property that is proposed
for development or is under contiguous ownership by the subdivider.
      (3)   The requirement for a preliminary plat is waived if the proposed
subdivision meets each of the following conditions:
         (a)   The subdivision will be platted and constructed in one phase;
         (b)   The subdivision will not require the extension of any public
utilities, streets or drainage infrastructure; and
         (c)   The subdivision does not propose and will not require
construction within any area shown as floodplain.
      (4)   A preliminary plat will also be required when previously platted
properties are to be materially altered or changed such that the new
subdivision would not meet the conditions listed in division (B)(3).
      (5)   Contours will be required on all preliminary plats in order to show
the lay of the land and to show any existing water courses that might be
present on the property.
   (C)   A final plat, approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City
Council, will be required prior to any work being started within the limits of
the final plat.
   (D)   Platting — a prerequisite for the issuance of a building permit.
      (1)   A final plat shall be duly recorded in the Johnson County Plat
Records prior to the issuance of a building permit.
      (2)   Building permits will not be issued until all public facilities
(streets, roads, water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage improvements and
the like) are completed and accepted by the City Engineer. Refer to §
154.009 for exceptions to the completion of improvements.
   (E)   Building permits may be issued, without requiring platting, when:
      (1)   The property was located in the city limits in 1957 and shown on
the “Official City of Cleburne Map,” and:
         (a)   Is thereby shown as single tract of land or lot, and has not
increased in size or been subdivided; and
         (b) Does not conflict with the city master plan; or
      (2)   The property is in a residential district and the proposed
construction is for any of the following purposes:
         (a)   Adding to an existing building or structure;
         (b)   Altering an existing building or structure;
         (c)   Adding an accessory building or structure; or
         (d)   Restoring any building or structure previously destroyed by
fire, explosion, or any other casualty or act of God, where the extent of the
destruction is not more than 50% of its reasonable market value; or
      (3)   The property was in separate ownership on or before June 8, 1965,
or before the property was annexed, provided that:
         (a)   The proposed building does not conflict with the City Master
Plan;
         (b)   The proposed building does not conflict with any other provision
of this code or any other ordinance of the city; or
         (c)   The proposed building site is located in an area which would not
block the extension of a current dead end street.
   (F)   Division (E) shall not allow the issuance of a building permit in
conflict with the restrictions of the general zoning ordinance or the
“nonconforming use ordinance.”
('68 Code, App. B, § 2.01) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. 3-1992-5,
passed 3-10-92; Am. Ord. 03-2022-29, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 154.021 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.
   At least one week prior to the filing of a preliminary plat, the subdivider
shall meet with the Planning and Zoning Coordinator to become familiar with the
city’s subdivision and zoning regulations. The subdivider shall submit a sketch
plan for purposes of general review and discussion with city staff members. At
the meeting, the general character of the development may be discussed, and
items may be included concerning zoning, utility service, street requirements
and other pertinent factors related to the proposed subdivision. At the
preapplication conference, the subdivider may be represented by a land planner,
engineer or surveyor.
('68 Code, App. B, § 2.01.1) (Ord. 3-1992-5, passed 3-10-92; Am. Ord. 03-2022-
29, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 154.022 PRELIMINARY PLATS — PROCEDURES FOR APPROVAL.
   (A)   On reaching conclusions as recommended in §
154.021, the subdivider shall have prepared a preliminary plat of the proposed
subdivision for submission to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (B)   Copies of the preliminary plat (in the amount stipulated by the
development review checklist) should be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commission through the Planning and Zoning Coordinator not less than 22 days
prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which consideration is
desired. Preliminary stormwater plans sufficient to document no adverse offsite
impact for review by the City Engineer shall be submitted at this time.
   (C)   A filing fee will be paid to the Planning and Zoning Coordinator at
the time of the submittal, as stipulated in the fee schedule set forth in §
154.007.
   (D)   The preliminary plat shall be considered officially filed after it is
accepted by the Planning and Zoning Coordinator and found to be in compliance
with the general provisions of these regulations, and the date of such findings
shall be considered the official filing date.
   (E)   The following notice shall be stamped on the face of each preliminary
plat: "Preliminary Plat - For review purposes only."
   (F)   The preliminary plat shall be distributed immediately upon receipt by
the Planning and Zoning Coordinator in accordance with the development review
checklist.
   (G)   Whenever a preliminary plat involves land in the city’s
extraterritorial jurisdiction, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City
Council shall act upon the plat in the same manner as a plat in the city
limits.
   (H)   A report shall be presented at the Planning and Zoning Commission at
its next regular meeting by the Planning and Zoning Coordinator, stating the
results of the subdivision review. The report should include comments relative
to the proposed subdivision’s compliance to these regulations, the
comprehensive plan or other plans, such as utility plans. The report may
include comments from municipal departments or other agencies concerned with
urban development.
   (I)   Following review of the preliminary plat and other materials submitted
for conformity thereof to these regulations, and negotiations with the
subdivider on changes deemed advisable, and the kind and extent of improvements
to be made by him, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall, within 30 days of
the official filing date, act on the submittal, and recommend approval,
approval with conditions, or disapproval of the proposed preliminary plat. If
the recommendation is approval with conditions or disapproval, the Commission
shall provide the subdivider with a written statement clearly articulating the
specific conditions for approval or reasons for disapproval. Each condition or
reason must be directly related to the requirements under this chapter. The
statement shall include a citation to the requirement under this chapter, other
ordinance, or statute, if applicable.
   (J)   Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the
final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval to the layout
submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final
plat.
   (K)   In its action on the preliminary plat, the Commission shall consider
the physical arrangement of the subdivision, determine the adequacy of street
and thoroughfare rights-of-way and alignment, the compliance of the streets and
thoroughfares with the comprehensive plan of the city, the existing street
pattern in the area, and any other applicable provisions of the comprehensive
plan. The Commission shall also ascertain that adequate easements for proposed
or future utility service and surface stormwater are provided, and that the lot
size and area comply with Chapter 155, Zoning.
   (L)   Within 30 days of the Commission’s approval of a preliminary plat, the
City Council shall act on the submittal, and approve, approve with conditions,
or disapprove the proposed preliminary plat. If approved with conditions or
disapproved, the Council shall provide the subdivider a written statement
clearly articulating the specific conditions for approval or reasons for
disapproval. Each condition or reason must be directly related to the
requirements under this chapter. The statement shall include a citation to the
requirement under this chapter, other ordinance, or statute, if applicable.
   (M)   At any time, the developer may submit a written response to the
Council that satisfies each condition or remedies each reason for disapproval.
The Council shall, not later than the fifteenth day after the date the response
was submitted, determine whether to approve or disapprove the preliminary plat.
   (N)   Validity and expiration.
      (1)   Approval of the preliminary plat shall be valid for a period of 24
months from the date of approval, and the general terms and conditions under
which the approval was granted will not be changed.
      (2)   The approval of a preliminary plat shall expire no later than 24
months from approval, unless one of the following occurs:
         (a)   A final plat is approved on any portion of the preliminary plat.
The validity of the preliminary plat is extended indefinitely after approval of
a final plat of any portion of the preliminary plat;
         (b)   The subdivider demonstrates progress towards completion of the
project as defined in Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code § 245.005. The preliminary plat will
remain valid and in effect as long as the subdivider continues to demonstrate
progress towards completion; or
         (c)   If a final plat has not been approved and progress towards
completion has not occurred, and the preliminary plat has not expired, the
subdivider may request an extension of preliminary plat approval.
            1.   If the Planning and Zoning Coordinator finds that no material
revisions are necessary for the approved preliminary plat to conform to current
subdivision and zoning regulations, an extension of the approval of a
preliminary plat may be granted for a period of up to 12 months. The Planning
and Zoning Coordinator may defer the extension request to City Council within
ten days of receipt of the request.
            2.   Additional extensions beyond the initial 12-month extension
may only be approved by City Council.
('68 Code, App. B, § 2.02) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. 08-2019-47,
passed 8-27-19; Am. Ord. 10-2020-62, passed 10-27-20; Am. Ord. 03-2022-29,
passed 3-22-2022)
§ 154.023 PRELIMINARY PLATS — DATA REQUIREMENTS.
   The subdivider or developer shall file copies of the preliminary plat as set
forth in the development review checklist and such plat shall be accompanied by
or show the following information:
   (A)   An accurate boundary survey, prepared by a surveyor, of the property
with bearings and distances referenced to survey lines and established
subdivisions, at a scale of one inch to not more than 200 feet.
   (B)   The same location and current zoning of a portion of adjoining final
plats and valid preliminary plats shall be drawn to the same scale and shown in
dotted lines adjacent to the tract proposed for subdivision in sufficient
detail to show the actual existing streets and alleys and other features that
may influence the layout and development of the proposed subdivision. These
items shall be shown on the adjacent property for a minimum of 200 feet. A
reference shall be cited on the plat to the record instrument which defines the
location of adjoining boundaries.
   (C)   Street rights-of-way shall be shown so that a street can be designed
to conform with §§
154.040 et seq. and
154.080 et seq.
   (D)   The location and widths of all streets, alleys and easements proposed
for the subdivision, and all known rights-of-way and/or easements within or
affecting the area to be subdivided. Also show approximate gradient of streets.
   (E)   The subdivision shall show all proposed streets and alleys, easements,
and blocks. Also show approximate location of lots, building lines, parks, and
the like.
   (F)   Topographic contours at one-foot intervals, except on terrain with
more than 2% grade in which event contours at two-foot intervals are permitted.
All elevations shall be based on the USGS datum. All easements or rights-of-way
necessary for stormwater within or outside the boundaries of the addition shall
be based upon a preliminary drainage study in accordance with §§
154.120 et seq. The source of contour information will be placed on the plat.
   (G)   The name under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded.
Subdivision names shall not be duplicative of the name of any recorded
subdivision.
   (H)   The name of the individual who prepared the plat.
   (I)   Sites, if any, proposed to be reserved or dedicated for parks,
schools, playgrounds or other public uses.
   (J)   Scale, north point, date, and general location sketch map.
   (K)   Property owner's name, address and telephone number.
   (L)   A designation of the existing zoning of land within the subdivision
and any zoning conflicts with proposed uses noted.
   (M)   Location of city limits line, the outer border of the city's
extraterritorial jurisdiction and zoning district boundaries if they traverse
the subdivision, from part of the boundary of the subdivision, or are
contiguous to such boundary.
   (N)   If the proposed subdivision is a portion of a tract which is later to
be subdivided in its entirety, then a preliminary plat of the entire tract
shall be submitted.
('68 Code, App. B, § 2.03) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. ORO8-1998-
46, passed 3-10-98)
§ 154.024 FINAL PLATS — PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL.
   (A)   Intent. After approval of the preliminary plat by the Commission and
the City Council within the time period established in §
154.022(N), and following approval of engineering plans and specifications for
the entire final plat, the subdivider may submit a final plat on a portion of
the approved preliminary plat. Copies of the final plat, as noted in the plat
application checklist shall be submitted for review. Any request for waiver of
public improvements must be submitted in writing with the final plat.
   (B)   (1)   The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary
plat as approved and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that
portion of the approved preliminary plat which they propose to record and
develop at the time, provided however, that such portion conforms to all
requirements of these regulations.
      (2)   The subdivision name and numbering on all final plats shall be
consistent with the approved preliminary plat. Block numbers shall run
consecutively throughout the entire subdivision, even though such subdivision
may be finally approved in sections.
   (C)   The official filing date of the final plat shall be the date upon
which the plat is found to be in substantial compliance with the provisions of
this chapter by the Planning and Zoning Coordinator or their authorized
representative.
   (D)   The Commission shall act on the final plat within 30 days after the
official filing date. If no action is taken by the Commission within 30 days
after the filing the final plat shall be deemed approved. A certificate showing
the filing date and failure to take action thereon within 30 days of the filing
date shall, on demand, be issued by the Commission and this certificate shall
be sufficient in lieu of a written endorsement or other evidence of approval.
   (E)   If the Commission recommends approval of the plat, the Chairperson
will certify its approval. The Commission will base its recommendation on their
determination that the plat is in proper form, and that the arrangement of the
development proposed for the property being subdivided is:
      (1)   In general conformance with the comprehensive plan;
      (2)   Consistent with zoning regulations;
      (3)   In compliance with all the provisions of this chapter which
includes having approved engineering plans and specifications for the entire
final plat.
   (F)   If the Commission recommends approval with conditions or disapproval
of the final plat, the Commission shall provide the subdivider a written
statement clearly articulating the specific conditions or reasons for
disapproval. Each condition or reason must be directly related to the
requirements under this chapter. The statement shall include a citation to the
requirement under this chapter, other ordinance, or statute, if applicable.
   (G)   At any time, the developer may submit a written response to the
Commission that satisfies each condition or remedies each reason for
disapproval. The Commission shall, not later than the fifteenth day after the
date the response was submitted, determine whether to approve or disapprove the
final plat.
   (H)   The City Council shall, within 30 days of the Commission's
recommendation of a final plat, act on the submittal, and approve, approve with
conditions, or disapprove the proposed final plat. If approved with conditions
or disapproved, the Council shall provide the subdivider a written statement
clearly articulating the specific conditions or reasons for disapproval. Each
condition or reason must be directly related to the requirements under this
chapter. The statement shall include a citation to the requirement under this
chapter, other ordinance, or statute, if applicable.
   (I)   Approval of the final plat does not impose on the city an obligation
regarding maintenance or improvements to any dedicated parts until the city
makes an actual appropriation of the dedicated parts.
   (J)   (1)   The final plat will be filed of record by the city, in the plat
records of Johnson County, after the requirements of §
154.060 have been met. The filing fees shall be paid by the subdivider or
developer.
      (2)   If the requirements of §
154.060 are not completed within five years of the date that City Council
approved the final plat, then the final plat will no longer be valid and will
require resubmittal for consideration.
   (K)   All plats and subdivisions of land within the city's extraterritorial
jurisdiction shall be governed and regulated by all of those ordinances duly
enacted by the City Council establishing rules and regulations governing plats
and subdivisions of land.
('68 Code, App. B, § 2.04) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. 08-2019-47,
passed 8-27-19; Am. Ord. 09-2022-67, passed 9-13-22)
§ 154.025 FINAL PLATS — DATA REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The subdivider of land on which approval has been obtained on a
preliminary plat shall have prepared and submitted a final plat to the Planning
Commission.
   (B)   The final plat submission shall consist of a reproducible transparent
drawing at a scale of 100 feet to one inch and copies of the reproducible
transparency. The reproducible copy shall be prepared on linen, mylar, or equal
stable base transparent drafting material and be clear and suitable for
reproduction and for recording purposes. The drawing size shall be 18 inches by
24 inches, or 18 inches by 12 inches. When necessary, the final plat may be on
several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision.
   (C)   The final plat shall show the following:
      (1)   The primary control points or monuments and descriptions and “ties”
to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar
data on the plat shall be referred. When the Cleburne monument system (an
extension of the Texas Plan Coordinate System) is established, the items in §
154.067(D) are required.
      (2)   Tract boundary line sufficient to locate the exact area proposed
for subdivision, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-
way and property lines of residential lots and other sites; with accurate
dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii, acres and central angle of
all curves.
      (3)   Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way.
      (4)   The full width and dimensions of each right-of-way, including the
center line to the edge of the property/dedication.
      (5)   All access points on the opposite edge of the right-of-way or
street frontage.
      (6)   Location and dimensions of all easements in accordance with §
154.045.
      (7)   Number to identify each lot or site and each block.
      (8)   Standard plat notes that accurately describe and directly relate to
the platted property.
      (9)   Standard plat notes as follows:
         (a)   A standard note that states the purpose of the proposed plat.
         (b)   A standard note that indicates the utility provider(s) for the
platted property.
         (c)   A standard note regarding the maintenance of easements.
         (d)   A standard note that prohibits construction within any easement.
         (e)   A standard note that indicates who shall be responsible for the
construction, maintenance, or operation of any "x" lots or common areas, if
applicable.
         (f)   A standard note regarding residential driveway access to major
collector and arterial streets, if applicable.
         (g)   A standard note regarding building setback lines, if applicable.
         (h)   A standard note stating the proposed plat does not attempt to
amend or remove recorded covenants or restricts, if applicable.
         (i)   A standard note that states that the plat is void unless
recorded within five years of the date of approval.
      (10)   Contact information for the owner, developer, and surveyor who
prepared the plat.
      (11)   Reference to recorded subdivision plats and/or adjoining platted
and unplatted land by record name within 200 feet of the platted property.
      (12)   Surveyor's certificate and seal, to be placed on the plat as
stated below:
   KNOWN ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
   That I,                                               Registered Public
Surveyor, Texas Registration No.              , hereby certify that this
correctly represents a survey made under my supervision on           , 20    .
The subdivision boundary corners are marked with iron pins.
               /s/                                    
                  Signature
               /s/                                    
                  Date
      (13)   A graphic scale and true north arrow.
      (14)   A title block that includes the subdivision name, lot and block
information, total acreage of the subdivision, and legal property description.
      (15)   The title block shall include the statement that the proposed
subdivision is "An addition to the City of Cleburne", or "An addition to the
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction of the City of Cleburne", as appropriate.
      (16)   Location of point of intersection and points of tangency of street
intersections other than right-angle intersections.
      (17)   A positive reference and identification of the plat and general
vicinity map (oriented north), showing the location of the city limits.
      (18)   Owner's certificate or deed of dedication (to be placed on or to
accompany the final plat). The dedication deed or certificate of dedication
shall be executed by all persons, firms, or corporations owning an interest in
the property subdivided or platted, and shall be acknowledged in the manner
prescribed by the laws for the state for conveyances of real property. The wife
of a married man executing such dedication deed or certificate of dedication
shall join with her husband therein. In the case of surface lien holders, they
may execute a subordination agreement subordinating their liens to all public
streets, alley, parks, school sites, and other public areas shown on the plat
of such subdivision as being set aside for public uses and purposes. The
dedication deed or certificate of dedication shall, in addition to the above
requirements, contain the following:
         (a)   An accurate metes and bounds description of the tract of land
subdivided.
         (b)   A statement and express representation that the parties joining
in such dedication are the sole owners of such tract of land.
         (c)   An express dedication without reservation to the public for
public use; the streets, alleys, rights-of-way, school site and any other
public areas shown on the attached plat.
         (d)   A positive reference and identification of the plat of such
subdivision.
         (e)   A designated signature and notary block for each of the property
owners.
      (19)   The 100-year floodplain elevation shall be written on the face of
the plat for every lot or building site located in the floodplain.
      (20)   Director certification. The Director of Public Works and Director
of Community Development shall furnish the following certificates which shall
appear on the plat:
   DIRECTOR CERTIFICATION
   Addition _________________________________
   Location Description _______________________
   I hereby certify that all requirements of the "Subdivision Ordinance" [i.e.,
Ch. 154 of the code of ordinances of the city] concerning submission and/or
approval of information and data required for Final Plat approval, have been
complied with for the above referenced subdivision.
         /s/ ____________________
            Director of Public Works
         /s/ ____________________
            Date
         /s/ ____________________
            Director of Community Development
         /s/ ____________________
            Date
      (21)   Johnson County Clerk Certification, to be placed on every page of
the plat.
      (22)   Certificate of approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission, if
applicable:
   CERTIFICATION OF PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
   Whereas the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Cleburne, Texas
voted affirmatively on this _______ day of ________, 20___, to recommend
approval of this plat.
         /s/ _________________________________________
            Chair, Planning and Zoning Commission
   This plat approved subject to all platting ordinances, rules, regulations,
and resolutions of the City of Cleburne, Texas.
      (23)   Certificate of approval by the City Council, if applicable:
   CERTIFICATION OF CITY COUNCIL
   Whereas the City Council of the City of Cleburne, Texas voted affirmatively
on this _______ day of ________, 20___, to approve this plat.
         /s/ _________________________________________
            Mayor, City of Cleburne
         /s/ _________________________________________
            Attest: City Secretary
   This plat approved subject to all platting ordinances, rules, regulations,
and resolutions of the City of Cleburne, Texas.
      (24)   Certificate of approval by the City Manager, if applicable:
   CERTIFICATION OF CITY MANAGER
         /s/ _________________________________________
            City Manager
         /s/ _________________________________________
            Date
('68 Code, App. B, § 2.05) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. OR08-1998-
46, passed 3-10-98; Am. Ord. 09-2022-67, passed 9-13-22)
§ 154.026 REPLATTING PROCEDURES; REPLATS AND PLAT REVISIONS.
   (A)   Replatting without vacating a preceding plat. A replat of a
subdivision or part of a subdivision may be recorded and is controlling over
the preceding plat without vacation of that plat if the replat:
      (1)   Is signed and acknowledged by all the owners of the property being
replatted;
      (2)   Is approved; and
      (3)   Does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions.
   (B)   A replat may be approved administratively in accordance with §
154.027.
   (C)   Replat exhibits. The developer shall submit an application for
approval of a replat with the Planning and Zoning Coordinator, which shall
contain the following exhibits:
      (1)   Replat application. The application shall be on forms furnished by
the Planning and Zoning Coordinator. If the applicant is not the official owner
of record, written authorization from the property owner is required.
      (2)   Replat drawing. The plat drawing shall contain the information
contained in §
154.025, required plat information, where applicable, and any additional items
provided on the checklist provided with the plat application.
      (3)   Engineering construction drawings. When the proposed development
requires the construction of public improvements, the applicant shall submit
construction plans and any required engineering studies before the replat
application for approval by the City Engineer. The construction drawings shall
conform to the technical specifications contained in the design standards
manual and shall be prepared and sealed by a licensed professional engineer,
licensed to practice in the State of Texas.
      (4)   Fees. The applicant shall pay the applicable plat application fee
when the application is submitted.
   (D)   Residential replats; variance or exception required. If a replat of
residential property, as described by § 212.015(a) of the Tex. Loc. Gov't Code,
requires a variance or exception to the requirements of this chapter, a public
hearing must be held. Notice of the hearing shall be given before the fifteenth
day before the date of the hearing by:
      (1)   Publication in the official newspaper of the city; and
      (2)   By written notice to the owners of lots that are in the original
subdivision and that are within 200 feet of the lots to be replatted as
indicated on the city's most recently approved tax roll or appraisal district
records.
      (3)   If the proposed replat requires a waiver from this chapter and is
protested by petition in accordance with state law, the proposed replat must
receive, in order to be approved, the affirmative vote of at least three-
fourths of the Commission or Council members present.
      (4)   For a legal protest or petition to be valid:
         (a)   The petition must be signed by the owners of at least 20% of the
area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed
replat and extending 200 feet from that area but within the original
subdivision;
         (b)   The petition must be submitted to the Commission or Council
prior to close of the public hearing; and
         (c)   The signatures on the petition must correspond with actual names
listed on the most recently approved municipal tax roll or appraisal district
records.
   (E)   Residential replats; no variance or exception. If a proposed replat
described by § 212.015(a) of the Tex. Loc. Gov't Code does not require a
variance or exception, not later than the fifteenth day after the date the
replat is approved, written notice shall be provided by mail of the approval of
the replat to each owner of a lot in the original subdivision that is within
200 feet of the lots to be replatted property according to the most recent
municipality or county tax roll. The notice must include the zoning designation
of the property and a telephone number and e-mail address an owner of a lot may
use to contact the city about the replat.
   (F)   Approval of replats.
      (1)    Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission shall, within 30
days of the date the application is filed, recommend approval, approval with
conditions or disapproval of the replat. If the Commission approves with
conditions or disapproves the replat, the Commission shall provide the owner a
written statement clearly articulating the specific conditions or reasons for
disapproval. Each condition or reason must be directly related to the
requirements under this chapter. The statement shall include a citation to the
requirement under this chapter, other ordinance, or statute, if applicable. At
any time, the developer may submit a written response to the Commission that
satisfies each condition or remedies each reason for disapproval. The
Commission shall, not later than the fifteenth day after the date the response
was submitted, determine whether to approve or disapprove the final plat.
      (2)    City Council. Within 30 days of the Commission recommendation of
the replat, the City Council shall approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove the replat. If the City Council approves with conditions or
disapproves the replat, the Commission shall provide the owner a written
statement clearly articulating the specific conditions or reasons for
disapproval. Each condition or reason must be directly related to the
requirements under this chapter. The statement shall include a citation to the
requirement under this chapter, other ordinance, or statute, if applicable. At
any time, the developer may submit a written response to the Council that
satisfies each condition or remedies each reason for disapproval. The City
Council shall, not later than the fifteenth day after the date the response was
submitted, determine whether to approve or disapprove the replat.
   (G)   Final action. If the Commission and the City Council approve a replat,
it shall be filed of record upon compliance with requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 08-2019-47, passed 8-27-19; Am. Ord. 09-2022-67, passed 9- 13-22)
§ 154.027 PROCEDURES FOR MINOR PLATS.
   (A)   Eligibility. Property being platted for the first time or property
being replatted is eligible for administrative approval if the proposed plat or
replat meets the following conditions:
      (1)   The plat conforms to the zoning code;
      (2)   The plat involves four or fewer lots fronting on an existing
street; and
      (3)   The plat does not require the creation of any new street or the
extension of municipal facilities in order to provide adequate service to all
lots of the proposed subdivision.
   (B)   Submission procedure. If the Director of Public Works determines the
proposed plat or replat is eligible for the administrative approval process,
the owner shall submit the following:
      (1)   Application and fee; and
      (2)   A final plat conforming to the requirements of §
154.025.
   (C)   Approval procedure. Upon completion of the submission procedure by the
owner, a committee composed of the Director of Public Works and the City
Manager is authorized to review the plat or replat submitted and to
administratively approve submissions which satisfy the requirements of §
154.025. The Director may, for any reason, elect to present the plat to the
Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council, or both, to approve the plat.
The Director of Public Works shall not disapprove the plat and is required to
refer any plat which he refuses to approve to the Planning and Zoning
Commission or City Council, or both, so that final approval can be considered
within 30 days after the final plat is filed.
('68 Code, App. B, § 2.07) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. 2-1991-8,
passed 2-28-91; Am. Ord. 03-2017-22, passed 3-28-17; Am. Ord. 08-2019-47,
passed 8-27-19)
§ 154.028 ROUGH PROPORTIONALITY.
   (A)   Proportionality determination.
      (1)   Before a decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission on an
application or for approval of a plat or plan for development, or prior to a
decision on any other application on which an exaction requirement is placed as
a condition of approval, the City Engineer shall affirm that the requirements
of this chapter, or other ordinance requiring the permit, as applied to the
proposed subdivision or development, do not impose costs on the applicant for
public infrastructure improvements that exceed those roughly proportionate to
the impact of the proposed subdivision or development. In making this
determination, the City Engineer may consider any information relating to the
impacts created by the proposed subdivision or development on the city's public
facilities systems, including:
         (a)   The proposed and potential use of the land;
         (b)   The timing and sequence of development in relation to
availability of adequate levels of public facilities systems;
         (c)   Impact fee studies; traffic impact studies; drainage studies; or
any other studies or standards that measure the demand for services created by
developments and the impact on the city's public facilities systems;
         (d)   The level of service and functionality of both on-site and off-
site public infrastructure improvements in serving the proposed subdivision or
development;
         (e)   The degree to which acceptable private infrastructure
improvements to be constructed and maintained by the applicant will offset the
need for public infrastructure improvements; and
         (f)   Any reimbursements for the costs of public infrastructure
improvements for which the proposed subdivision is eligible.
      (2)   The City Engineer may require an applicant and the applicant's
engineer, at their expense, submit reasonable information or studies that may
assist in making the proportionality determination.
   (B)   Appeal to City Council.
      (1)   A subdivider or other applicant for approval of a plat or plan for
development, or other permit which imposes an exaction requirement as a
condition of approval may appeal the City Engineer's determination under
division (A) to the City Council under Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 212.904. To
pursue an appeal, the subdivider or applicant must file a written notice of
appeal with the City Secretary within ten days of the date the Planning and
Zoning Commission or the city official responsible for issuing the permit takes
an action applying the exaction requirement, which may include denial of the
permit or plat. The notice of appeal shall:
         (a)   Specifically state each exaction requirement for which relief is
sought;
         (b)   For each requirement, state the reasons application of the
requirement is not roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impact
created by the proposed subdivision or development; and
         (c)   Where appropriate, propose an alternative requirement the
subdivider or applicant contends is roughly proportional to the nature and
extent of the impact created by the proposed subdivision or development.
      (2)   The City Secretary shall forward the appeal to the City Council for
consideration.
   (C)   Appeal to court. An applicant may appeal the decision of the City
Council to the county or district court of the county in which the development
is located, within 30 days of the date that the City Council issues its final
decision.
(Ord. 06-2019-32, passed 6-11-19)
§ 154.029 AMENDING PLATS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Preliminary plats, final plats, minor plats, and replats are
eligible for plat amendment, provided the amendment meets the criteria
contained in this Section:
      (2)   Plat amendments shall only be permitted to address the matters
listed in § 212.016(a) of the Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, as amended:
         (a)   To correct an error in a course, a distance or a real property
description that is shown on a preceding plat;
         (b)   To add a course or distance that was omitted on a preceding
plat;
         (c)   To correct an error in the documentation, location, or character
of a monument shown incorrectly on a preceding plat;
         (d)   To indicate monuments set after the death, disability or
retirement from practice of the professional engineer or surveyor responsible
for setting monuments;
         (e)   To show the change in location or character of a monument shown
incorrectly on a preceding plat;
         (f)   To correct an error or omission in a previously approved plat
that impacts the lots of the subdivision. This could include lot numbers,
acreage, street names and identification of adjacent recorded plats;
         (g)   To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines
between two adjacent lots, provided that:
            1.   The owners of both impacted lots jointly file the application
for plat amendment;
            2.   Neither lot is abolished and the number of lots does not
change;
            3.   No recorded covenant or restriction is removed; and
            4.   The amendment does not have materially adverse effects on the
property rights of owners of other parcels within the plat in question; or
         (h)   To relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment
of a building or other improvement on a lot line or easement;
         (i)   To relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent
lots if:
            1.   The owners of all those lots join in the application for
amending the plat;
            2.   The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or
restrictions; and
            3.   The amendment does not increase the number of lots;
         (j)   To make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six or
fewer lots in the subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by the
preceding plat if:
            1.   The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other
regulations of the municipality;
            2.   The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or
restrictions; and
            3.   The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the
municipal planning commission or other appropriate governing body of the
municipality has approved, after a public hearing, as a residential improvement
area; or
         (k)   To replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if:
            1.   The owners of all those lots join in the application for
amending the plat;
            2.   The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or
restrictions;
            3.   The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and
            4.   The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new
street or make necessary the extension of municipal facilities.
      (3)   Notice, a hearing, and the approval of other lot owners are not
required for the approval and issuance of an amending plat.
   (B)   Application submittal. Copies of the amending plat application shall
be submitted in accordance with all provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Approval procedure. Upon completion of the submission procedure by the
owner, a committee composed of the Director of Public Works and the City
Manager is authorized to review the amending plat submitted and to
administratively approve submissions which satisfy the requirements of §
154.025. The Director may, for any reason, elect to present the amending plat
to the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council, or both, to approve the
plat. The Director of Public Works shall not disapprove the plat and is
required to refer any plat which he refuses to approve to the Planning and
Zoning Commission or City Council, or both, so that final approval can be
considered within 30 days after the plat is filed.
(Ord. 08-2019-47, passed 8-27-19)
§ 154.030 CONVEYANCE PLATS.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   A conveyance plat is used solely for the purpose of subdividing
property and creating a recording instrument of that subdivision, or recording
the creation of a single existing lot or parcel created by other means.
      (2)   A conveyance plat may be used to convey or sell property or
interests therein.
      (3)   A conveyance plat is not considered to be the initial step in
development of a project and is not intended to provide, or be predictive of,
details, regulations, or standards regarding future development of, or projects
on, the property.
      (4)   A conveyance plat may not be used to establish vested rights on the
property or to vest the property with rights to the code, or other applicable
ordinances or regulations, in place at the time the conveyance plat is
approved. Future plat and permit approvals shall be based upon the code and
other applicable ordinances and regulations in place at the time such
application(s) are submitted.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   A conveyance plat may be used only to record the subdivision of
property in the city, or the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city,
provided that all lots created by the conveyance plat meet the requirements of
this section.
      (2)   A conveyance plat shall not be approved for any property zoned "SF"
or a PD (planned development district) whose base zoning is "SF", unless all
lots shown on the conveyance plat are shown to have provided the following:
         (a)   Direct access to an existing public street; and
         (b)   Are adequately served by, or have direct access at the property
line to, public utilities, or meet the minimum required size to be served by
private water or sewer systems.
   (C)   Not to be used for purpose of approving development. A conveyance plat
does not constitute any approval of development on the property and does not
take the place of other required plats, including, but not limited to,
preliminary plats and final plats.
   (D)   Application submittal and requirements.
      (1)   The conveyance plat application shall be submitted in accordance
with all provisions of this section.
      (2)   The plat drawing shall provide the information listed in §
154.025, “Required Plat Information,” where applicable.
      (3)   A conveyance plat is only for the subdivision of property and shall
include a notation on the face of the plat that states: "This Conveyance Plat
is approved solely for the purpose of defining lots and other interests in the
property described herein. No development of the property has been approved and
no approval of future development or acceptance of public improvements is
expressed or implied with the approval of this Conveyance Plat. No permanent
utility service, construction permits, including building permits, or
Certificates of Occupancy shall be issued until a Final Plat is approved, filed
of record, and public improvements are accepted by the City in accordance with
its ordinances and regulations. The City may, in accordance with adopted
ordinances, regulations, and master plans in effect at the time of future plat
approval, require additional rights-of-way, easements, or other property to be
dedicated upon a Final Plat for all or a portion of the property subject to
this Conveyance Plat."
   (E)   Reservation or dedication of public right-of-way.
      (1)   All lots created by a conveyance plat shall have frontage upon, or
access to, an existing, or proposed, public street that is specified on the
city's Master Thoroughfare Plan. Development, including building construction,
shall not occur on the property until adequate street connections are completed
to each lot per approved civil plans, notwithstanding any utility or other
improvements that are required before obtaining such development approval.
      (2)   Reservation of future rights-of-way is required to be shown on the
conveyance plat for any existing or planned roadways in accordance with this
chapter. Right-of-way reservation acknowledges the future obligation to
dedicate right-of-way for public thoroughfares and streets specified on the
city's Master Thoroughfare Plan. Reservation of right-of-way does not grant any
right or interest in the property to the city or other entity. The final width
and configuration of streets and right-of-way to be dedicated may be adjusted
upon approval of a final plat in accordance with approved civil plans.
      (3)   Dedication, rather than reservation, of right-of-way shall be
required where a conveyance plat is used to record the remainder of a tract
left over following the approval of the final plat on a portion of the
property. The required right-of-way dedication under this chapter shall be
limited to that which is necessary to provide access to the property subject to
the final plat, and to allow for construction of turn lanes, intersections, and
transitions in road pavement width resulting from development of the property
subject to the final plat. Additional right-of-way may be required with
approval of a final plat for all or a portion of the remainder of the property
subject to the conveyance plat.
   (F)   Effect of approval.
      (1)   No building permits shall be issued, nor shall development commence
upon property for which a conveyance plat has been approved until all other
applicable requirements of this chapter, and other applicable chapters of the
code, or other applicable ordinances and regulations, have been met, including,
but not limited to, approval of required civil plans and preliminary and final
plats.
      (2)   Conveyance plat approval does not relieve the property owner, or
future owners, from obligations, including, but not limited to, rough
proportionality costs, impact fees, or dedication of property for public
purpose, that are required by other sections of this chapter, other applicable
chapters of the code, other applicable ordinances and regulations, or by the
city's adopted master plans, regarding the improvement of the property or
extension of services as required to make the property suitable for
development.
      (3)   Neither reservation nor dedication of right-of-way shall relieve
the property owner from any obligation for street construction or assessments
required under this chapter or any other chapter of the code or other
applicable ordinances and regulations.
      (4)   If a preliminary plat is approved for all, or a portion, of the
property shown on a recorded conveyance plat, the preliminary plat is
controlling on that portion of the property. For the purposes of determining
the compliance of a future final plat, the preliminary plat will supersede the
conveyance plat, but the conveyance plat is not vacated or replated on that
portion of the property unless and until a final plat is approved and filed of
record.
      (5)   The filing of a final plat upon all or a portion of the property
shown on a conveyance plat permanently supersedes the conveyance plat on the
portion of the property within the boundaries of the final plat.
      (6)   Easements for access, utilities, and drainage may be recorded on
conveyance plats and may be vacated by a final plat approved for the same
property, subject to the requirements for easement vacation in this chapter.
   (G)   Approval procedure.
      (1)   Upon completion of the submission procedure by the owner, a
conveyance plat shall be reviewed and approved administratively if it meets the
requirements of this section and otherwise qualifies as a minor plat under §
154.027(A)(1) through (3), as amended.
      (2)   Conveyance plats that meet the requirements of this section but do
not qualify as a minor plat under §
154.027 shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its
recommendation and to City Council for approval, approval with conditions, or
disapproval in accordance with the approval procedure in §
154.024.
   (H)   Plat filing.
      (1)   No final plat processed and approved in association with a
conveyance plat shall be filed of record without the prior filing of the
associated approved conveyance plat.
      (2)   An approved conveyance plat shall be filed of record, and all
associated filing fees paid, within 180 days of the date of approval. The City
Manager's designee may grant one discretionary approval for an additional 60
days from the initial 180 day period. Any conveyance plat that is not filed
within the time specified herein shall be void and approval of a new conveyance
plat shall be required subject to the standards in place at the time the new
application is made."
(Ord. 01-2023-03, passed 1-24-23)
MINIMUM PLATTING DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 154.040 CONFORMITY REQUIRED.
   The physical design of the proposed subdivision shall conform to the
planning policies of the city and the following minimum standards set forth in
this subchapter.
('68 Code, App. B, Art. III, preamble) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.041 STREET STANDARDS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, provisions shall be made
for the extension of major streets in accordance with the thoroughfare plan of
the city. Collector streets shall be provided for the circulation of traffic in
and out of the subdivision and the connection thereof to the major streets.
Adequate local streets shall be provided to accommodate the subdivision.
   (B)   Where such is not shown in the thoroughfare plan, the arrangement of
streets in a subdivision shall either:
      (1)   Provide for the continuation of appropriate projection of existing
major streets in surrounding areas;
      (2)   Conform to a plan for a neighborhood approved or adopted by the
Commission to meet a particular situation where topography or other conditions
make continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical; or
      (3)   Conform to a plan for street location or extension approved by the
City Council after review by the Commission.
   (C)   Local streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic
in residential areas will be discouraged.
   (D)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major
street, the Commission may require that no driveways for residential purposes
be allowed or other such treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection
of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local
traffic.
   (E)   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or
freeway, the Commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on
each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use
of the intervening land. The distance of a street from a railroad or freeway
shall recognize the problem of approach grades and future grade separations.
   (F)   Street intersections.
      (1)   More than two streets intersecting at a point shall be avoided,
except where it is impractical to secure a proper street system otherwise and
approval of such special intersections shall be based upon detail review of the
design of the intersection including the need for any traffic signalization
which may be required for safety.
      (2)   Where several streets converge at one point, or acute intersection
angles are present, setback lines, special rounding or cutoff corners may be
required to insure safety and facilitation of orderly traffic movements.
      (3)   No major thoroughfare shall intersect any other major street at an
angle of less than 80 degrees.
      (4)   No collector street shall intersect a major street in an angle of
less than 70 degrees, or another collector street at an angle of less than 70
degrees.
      (5)   No local street shall intersect any major street at an angle of
less than 80 degrees, or any collector street at an angle of less than 65
degrees.
   (G)   Cul-de-sacs, dead ends or courts. Cul-de-sacs, courts or places may be
permitted where the form or contour of the land or the shape of the property
makes such street design appropriate. Such cul-de-sacs, courts, or places shall
provide proper access to all lots and shall generally not exceed 500 feet in
length and a turn-around shall be provided at the closed end which has a
minimum right-of-way radius of 60 feet except that if an equally safe and
convenient form of paved space is approved by the Commission in place of a
turning circle. Such approved space may be improved as agreed upon.
   (H)   Streets with centerline offset of less than 180 feet shall not be
approved except in special cases recommended by the City Engineer and approved
by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Collector streets shall not have a
centerline offset of less than 300 feet when they are not continuous.
   (I)   Street right-of-way width shall be in conformance with the City's
Master Thoroughfare Plan and shall not be less than as follows:
 
Street Type                                           Right-of-Way
Freeway or expressway                                 As required
Principal arterial (thoroughfare)                     135 ft.
Minor arterial (thoroughfare)                         105 ft.
Collector (includes industrial or commercial street)  75 ft.
Local, residential                                    50 ft.
Legacy road (existing roads only, that meet criteria) 28-49 ft.
 
   (J)   The maximum street right-of-way the subdivider shall be required to
dedicate in the subdivision of land shall be 135 feet in width.
   (K)   Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision land where the Planning and Zoning
Commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other
half of a street when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a half
street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half to the street
shall be platted within such tract. Half major or collector streets and one-
half of the street shall be required from each property.
   (L)   No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with
the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to approval of the
City Council.
   (M)   Street numbers are to be assigned by the city.
   (N)   All rights-of-way shall be platted to permit street designs to conform
with §§
154.080 et seq.
('68 Code, App. B, § 3.01) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. 04-2022-40,
passed 4-26-22)
§ 154.042 ALLEY STANDARDS.
   Alleys dedicated to the public are not permitted.
('68 Code, App. B, § 3.02) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.043 BLOCK STANDARDS.
   (A)   The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
      (1)   Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the type of use contemplated.
      (2)   Zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions.
      (3)   Needs for convenient access, circulation control and safety of
street traffic.
      (4)   Limitation and opportunities of topography.
   (B)   Block lengths shall not exceed 1,600 feet except under unusual
conditions approved by the Commission. Lot depths shall not be less than the
minimum standards prescribed by
Chapter 155, Zoning.
('68 Code, App. B, § 3.03) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.044 LOT STANDARDS.
   (A)   The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and the minimum
building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision
and for the type of development and use contemplated and shall not be less than
those specified as minimum standards by
Chapter 155, Zoning.
   (B)   Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and
industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and
parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated.
   (C)   Lots zoned for development of single-family and two-family dwellings
shall front upon a public street. Exceptions may be permitted for lots zoned
for condominium, townhouse and apartment developments, and commercial and
industrial subdivisions when the access easement as required by §
154.045(B) has been provided.
   (D)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided, except
where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic
arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
   (E)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street line unless other arrangements are approved by the Commission.
   (F)   Where the area is divided into larger lots than for normal urban
building sites and, in the opinion of the Commission, any or all of the tracts
are susceptible of being resubdivided, the original subdivision shall be such
that the alignment of future street dedications may conform to the general
street layout in the surrounding area and so that the larger tracts may be
later subdivided in conformance with the requirements of this chapter and the
minimum standards specified by
Chapter 155, Zoning.
('68 Code, App. B, § 3.04) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.045 EASEMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Utility easements shall be provided within the proposed subdivision as
may be necessary to assure the proper design, installation and maintenance of
either underground or aerial utilities. Easement widths shall be determined by
the type of utility; however, an easement shall not normally be required
adjacent to a dedicated right-of-way.
   (B)   The minimum width for easements shall be:
      (1)   Utility easements (along property lines) shall be eight feet on
each side of the property line;
      (2)   Drainage easements shall be the width of the drainage structure
plus five feet on each side, rounding the total distance down to the nearest
foot, or the width of the 50-year floodplain, whichever is greater.
   (C)   When the City Engineer finds that easements in areas adjoining
proposed subdivisions are necessary to provide adequate passage of stormwater
or to serve such subdivisions with utilities, the subdivider shall have the
primary responsibility for obtaining such easements.
   (D)   When a proposed subdivision is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream or a proposed stormwater easement, the developer
shall make the improvements required in §§
154.120 et seq. and dedicate the required right-of-way or easements.
   (E)   Wherever land which is covered by a floodway designation under
Chapter 151, Floodplain Management, a stormwater easement shall be placed on
the plat covering the floodway area and such easement shall allow for access,
maintenance or alteration of the floodway area by the city. A statement shall
be placed on the plat as follows: “Structures, including fences and fill
material are prohibited in the floodway.”
   (F)   Mutual access easements:
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this requirement is to provide public
access to adjacent properties by reducing the number of driveway cuts and
potential traffic accidents on adjacent streets.
      (2)   Applicability. This section shall be applicable to properties
abutting and that may derive access from a collector street or arterial street
as shown on the Master Thoroughfare Plan.
      (3)   Requirement. The city shall require the dedication of a mutual
access easement to provide cross access to adjacent properties or shared use of
a driveway to facilitate traffic flow between lots.
      (4)   Easement dimensions. Easement width shall be 24 feet and the length
shall be the full width of adjoining properties fronting the roadway. The
Director of Public Works may approve an alternative layout as necessary given
the shape of the particular tract. The location of all mutual access easements
shall be approved by the city.
('68 Code, App. B, § 3.05) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. 12-2017-76,
passed 12-12-17; Am. Ord. 03-2025-11, passed 3-25-25)
§ 154.046 SPECIAL COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISION STANDARDS.
   An industrial subdivision shall be processed for approval in the same manner
as provided for a residential subdivision, except that no individual lots need
be shown on such plat and only streets, blocks, easements, and minimum building
lines need be indicated. The minimum right-of-way width of a minor street in an
industrial or commercial subdivision shall be 60 feet or as required by the
Commission and all other streets shall conform to the standards for major and
secondary streets prescribed by the major thoroughfare plan.
('68 Code, App. B, § 3.06) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.047 PARK FACILITIES.
   Park and open space design features and dedication requirements.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The requirements for open space, park and
recreational areas contained in this section are intended to ensure that there
will be sufficient land dedicated or otherwise set aside to meet the demand and
need of the future residents for open space and parks. In determining the size,
shape, and quality of open space and parks areas that should be set aside and
reserved in the manner set out in this section, the city has considered the
projected growth in population and development within the municipality and the
amount of open space and park and recreational facilities needed to accommodate
such growth as stated in the Parks, Recreation, Trails & Open Space Master
Plan.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   Unplatted property. This section, as amended, applies to all
residential property for which a final plat has not been formally submitted to
the city for approval, unless otherwise noted herein.
      (2)   Exempt property. Any tract or lot occupied by an existing
residential dwelling unit at the time of adoption of this section shall be
exempt from the dedication requirements of this section herein if the
residential dwelling remains on the lot. This exemption pertains only to the
tract or lot with the existing residential dwelling. Any additional lots
created by further subdivision of the property shall be subject to the
requirements herein.
      (3)   Date of assessment. All requirements in this section shall be
assessed at the time of approval of the final plat of any applicable property.
   (C)   Land dedication requirements; general. Land dedication shall be
incorporated as a part of each residential development where applicable. Land
dedication requirements herein are based on the city’s adopted Land Use Plan
and the Parks Recreation, Trails & Open Space Master Plan. It is within the
sole discretion of the city to require a developer to show the anticipated land
dedication requirements herein with the development plan, concept plan,
preliminary plat, final plat, or other appropriate development submittals.
      (1)   Residential developments. Based on the population projected to
reside in the city and the stated desire in the Parks, Recreation, Trails &
Open Space Master Plan adopted by the City Council to provide 17.3 acres of
park land for every 1,000 residents in an ultimate condition, park land meeting
the requirements contained within this section shall be dedicated to the city
at a ratio of one acre of park land for every 60 residential dwelling units or
prorated portion thereof.
      (2)   Off-site dedications. With the consent of the City Council, a
developer may dedicate the required park land for development at another
location within the city, provided that the off-site land dedication is in
accordance with this section.
   (D)   Characteristics of parkland; general. The city shall consider the
characteristics of proposed dedicated park land as outlined in the Parks,
Recreation, Trails & Open Space Master Plan and as recommended by the Park
Board. In determining whether to accept or refuse the dedication of park lands,
fees, facilities or a combination thereof as outlined below, the Park Board,
Planning and Zoning Commission, and City Council shall consider the Parks,
Recreation, Trails & Open Space Master Plan recommendations and use it as a
guideline for such decisions.
   (E)   Alternatives to land dedication. In any case where a dedication is
required, the City Council shall have the right to accept the dedication as
submitted for approval, or in the alternative, to refuse dedication of the
same, and in lieu thereof to require payment of cash under the formula
contained in this section or to allow the developer to construct recreation or
park improvements. The city may permit a combination of dedication,
improvements and fees to be used to fulfill this requirement.
      (1)   Fee payment.
         (a)   Approval of fee payment. The City Council shall determine the
acceptability of a developer’s payment of fees in lieu of the land dedication
requirement of this section.
         (b)   Calculation of fees.
            1.   The City Council shall establish an acreage land value cost
figure to be used in calculating park fees. This determination shall be based
on a reasonable study and investigation performed biennially, or as directed by
City Council as to the average fair market value, as opposed to tax value, of
undeveloped acreage suitable for residential use within the city. This figure
shall be the acreage cost under which all park fees are calculated.
            2.   Residential dwelling unit fees. Fees paid in lieu of
dedication shall be based on the determined cost of one acre of land divided by
60, for a resulting fee per residential dwelling unit.
         (c)   Collection of fees. Fees shall be collected prior to plat being
filed with the county. No building permit shall be issued nor shall any
construction be allowed to begin until payment of any fees required by this
section have been made, as specified in a developer’s agreement approved by the
city, or other city documentation.
      (2)   Physical or equipment improvements to parks; Compatibility with
Parks, Recreation, Trails & Open Space Master Plan. A developer may, if
approved by the City Council, have the option of improving existing facilities
within municipal parks or improving dedicated park land in lieu of park land
dedication or payment of cash, based on recommendations made in the Parks,
Recreation, Trails & Open Space Master Plan. Should any of these options be
exercised, the municipality and the developer shall, prior to initiation of
work on such improvements, enter into a developer’s agreement for credit of
expenses for authorized park improvements. In no case shall the municipality be
required to reimburse the developer if he or she chooses to improve parklands
at an amount greater than required. Such a proposed agreement to provide
facility improvements in lieu of dedication shall be submitted in writing with
the application for any required concept plan or site plan. In the event that
no concept plan or site plan is required, the agreement shall be submitted with
the application for the preliminary plat. Any improvements for which credit is
requested must be submitted for approval by the City Council in a developer’s
agreement.
   (F)   Private open space/parks. If a developer desires to incorporate
private park, recreation or open space areas or amenities within his or her
development, they may request credit for these facilities against their public
open space dedication requirements. A developer may request credit for any
private park, recreation or open space area, and such private park, recreation
or open space amenities may satisfy 100% of the total park and open space
dedication requirement of this section. Private park, recreation and open space
areas or amenities must be owned and maintained by an entity other than the
city.
   (G)   Approval process.
      (1)   Land dedications.
         (a)   Park Board recommendation. The Director of Parks and Recreation
or the Director’s designated representative shall report to the Park Board
regarding any park land dedication from a development application submitted to
the city which would result in a land dedication of five acres or greater, or
which is proposed by a developer, or for which a dedication is proposed by
staff. The Park Board may then make a formal recommendation to the Planning and
Zoning Commission to accept or refuse any proposed dedicated park land prior to
the Commission’s action on the development. In the event that the Parks and
Recreation Board is unable to meet due to a lack of quorum prior to the
Planning and Zoning Commission meeting, a formal recommendation from the
Director of Parks and Recreation shall be provided instead to the Commission.
         (b)   Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation. The Planning and
Zoning Commission shall consider the recommendation of the Park Board in
determining the acceptability of any park land dedications proposed on any
development. The Commission recommendation shall then be forwarded to the City
Council, where applicable, for final approval.
         (c)   Final plat dedications. Where review of development applications
results in the city’s desire for land dedication, such land dedication shall be
shown on a final plat and shall contain a clear fee simple dedication of that
land to the city.
      (2)   Fee payments in lieu of dedication and/or facilities improvements.
         (a)   City Council approval.
            1.   The City Council shall enter into an agreement with the
developer for the provision of dedicated park land, fees in lieu of dedication,
facilities construction or improvement, or a combination thereof as outlined
below.
            2.   Developer’s agreements. Developer’s agreements between the
city and the developer shall include the following requirements as applicable:
               A.   Boundary corners established. Each corner of the park land
to be dedicated shall be permanently monumented with three-quarter-inch iron
pins set in concrete. These shall be located and identified on a recordable
plat or land survey completed by a land surveyor registered in the State of
Texas and provided to the city by the owner and/or developer.
               B.   Utility extensions to park. All park land dedicated to the
city shall have access to public utilities, including water and sewer. If
requested by the city, water and sewer mains shall be extended by the owner
and/or developer within the proposed park land to a location specified by the
Director of Public Works.
               C.   Short-term maintenance. The owner and/or developer agree
that no construction materials shall be disposed of or deposited within the
park by its contractor, subcontractors, employees or agents at any time while
the subdivision is being built. If materials are deposited or disposed of
within the park, the owner and/or developer shall be required to remove these
materials within 72 hours of written notice by the city. Before the city
accepts this land, the developer shall remove all trash and dead trees.
   (H)   Use of funds.
      (1)   Fund established. Funds received by the city pursuant to this
section will be deposited in a special fund dedicated to the accumulation of
monies required by this section.
      (2)   Permitted expenditures. Monies placed in this fund may be expended
only for the purchase, lease, or other acquisition of park and open space areas
by the city, the improvement and site preparation of such areas and sites, the
extension of utilities to or within such sites, the installation of
landscaping, play equipment or recreation improvements on such sites, and/or
attendant engineering and planning costs associated with such park development.
      (3)   Inappropriate expenditures. Monies placed in this fund may not be
utilized for any other general business activity of the city or for maintenance
of park facilities.
      (4)   Authorization for use of funds. All expenditures from this fund
shall be made in accordance with the city’s Parks, Recreation, Trails & Open
Space Master Plan and shall be approved by the City Council after a formal
recommendation of the Park Board.
(Ord. 11-2021-64, passed 11-9-21)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.060 CONSTRUCTION AUTHORIZATION.
   The developer shall not commence construction of any community facilities
until a written construction authorization has been received from the City
Engineer. Prior to the issuance of the construction authorization, the
developer must have:
   (A)   An approved final plat;
   (B)   Final engineering plans for streets, drainage, water and sewer, which
have been approved by the City Engineer within the last 12 months. All existing
plans shall expire 12 months from the date of approval of this chapter.
   (C)   The contractor provide the following to the City Engineer: Payment
bond for 100% of the cost of the project, and a two-year maintenance bond for
50% of the cost of the project;
   (D)   Paid to the city a fee for the engineering design review and
construction inspection services, the amount of the fee shall be determined by
the City Engineer in compliance with state and local requirements.
   (E)   Participated in a preconstruction conference with the City Engineer
and prime contractor(s). Either the developer or contractor must provide the
City Engineer with a general schedule for the construction.
('68 Code, App. B, § 4.01) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. 9-2002-63,
passed 9-10-02; Am. Ord. 03-2020-20, passed 3-10-20; Am. Ord. 08-2023-59,
passed 8-22-23)
§ 154.061 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The developer shall give at least 24-hours' notice to the City
Engineer of intent to commence actual construction of the community facilities
so that inspection personnel can be made available. The developer may be
subject to the fine set forth in §
154.999 for each day of violation for failure to comply with this provision.
   (B)   If the developer's contractor leaves the job site for five consecutive
work days (for reasons other than weather related causes), at least 24-hours'
notice of intent to commence construction shall again be required. Any work
initiated prior to notice to the City Engineer is subject to be removed.
   (C)   The developer shall not connect buildings to service lines of sewer
and water mains which have not been accepted by the city.
   (D)   It shall be the responsibility of the developer to ensure that all
contractors and subcontractors working for him comply with this section.
Certification of materials being used may be required by the city.
   (E)   The developer shall pay for laboratory testing as required by the
city’s standard specifications and also pay for any retests taken because the
first or a subsequent test failed to meet the plans and specifications.
   (F)   Should any point not be covered in the plans or this chapter, the
developer shall be required to contact the City Engineer for a determination as
to the city's requirements.
   (G)   Any work, in the opinion of the Inspector, that does not meet the city
requirements shall be corrected. The Inspector will notify the contractor and
developer of the reason(s) for requiring the contractor to cease all operations
until the defect has been corrected so as to comply with city requirements and
receive proper inspection.
('68 Code, App. B, § 4.02) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. 03-2020-20,
passed 3-10-20)
§ 154.062 ACCEPTANCE OF COMMUNITY FACILITIES.
   (A)   When the project is complete and all survey monuments are established
(if required), the developer shall ask the City Engineer to conduct a final
inspection. If all work is completed in accordance with the city's standard
specifications, an affidavit of bills paid for all community facilities and
“plans of record” drawings by the developer's engineer must be provided to the
City Engineer.
   (B)   Upon receipt of those items, the City Engineer will send a letter of
acceptance of community facilities to the developer with a copy furnished to
the Planning and Zoning Coordinator and the Building Official.
   (C)   Building permits will not be issued prior to the receipt of letter of
acceptance from the City Engineer for all community facilities and the
recording of the final plat in the Plat Records in the County Clerk's office.
Refer to §
154.009 for exceptions.
('68 Code, App. B, § 4.03) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.063 CITY-DEVELOPER JOINT PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   City-developer agreement. The city and developer may enter into an
agreement allowing for city participation in the construction of certain public
facilities as outlined in this section and as provided in Tex. Loc. Gov't Code,
Ch. 212, Subch. C, as amended.
      (1)   Oversizing. At the request of the city, the developer shall install
oversized physical improvements within the limits of the proposed development
with the city participating to the extent of oversized utilities and/or streets
that may be required by the city, which is determined to be in the best
interest of the public.
      (2)   Off-site public improvements. At the request of the property owner
or developer, the city may consider reimbursement of costs associated with off-
site public improvements, with the city participating to the extent off-site
utilities and/or streets serve areas beyond the proposed development, which is
determined to be in the best interest of the public.
      (3)   The city-developer agreement shall include at a minimum the
following information;
         (a)   Property owner or developer name, address, phone number;
         (b)   Engineering opinion of probable cost for the proposed public
improvements;
         (c)   The specified level of cost participation by the city, including
a "not to exceed" statement for the city level of participation;
         (d)   Exhibits showing the proposed improvements; and
         (e)   Details on the process for reimbursement including but not
limited to:
            1.   Requirements to receive reimbursement;
            2.   City participation shall be calculated based on actual costs
and actual public improvements constructed;
            3.   Timing of reimbursement, to be after completion and final
acceptance of public improvements, unless otherwise approved by City Council;
and
            4.   The city-developer agreement, including the terms of financial
participation, will be specifically approved by the City Council prior to the
developer's installation of the public improvements.
   (B)   Facilities eligible for city participation. The property owner or
developer shall be responsible for the entire initial cost of installing public
facilities, including over-sizing. As funds become available, the city may
participate in the costs of installing public improvements as follows:
      (1)   Generally. The city will pay only the cost of over-sizing
facilities larger than those required to serve the development alone in
accordance with the Master Thoroughfare Plan and the Water/Waste Water Master
Plan. The city may participate in the costs of public improvements including
but not limited to the water systems, wastewater systems, streets, and drainage
systems that are not for the primary benefit of the proposed development and
that have been oversized to serve developments other than that for which the
plat has been submitted for approval;
      (2)   Streets. The city may participate in the cost of street
improvements to alleviate traffic problems on a case-by-case basis.
      (3)   Water and sanitary sewer lines. Any water or sanitary sewer line
that exceeds eight inches in diameter, and is required by the Public Works
Director or city policy to be sized above eight inches in diameter in order to
serve properties beyond the boundaries of the subdivision or property being
developed, may be eligible for oversize reimbursement. In the event the city
determines that a water or sanitary sewer line size greater than eight inches
in diameter is required to serve the development alone, no oversize
reimbursement will be paid.
      (4)   Drainage facilities. The city may participate in the costs of
drainage facilities required to accommodate potential runoff from an upstream
drainage area. This may include additional detention storage or the increase in
capacity of downstream drainage structures.
      (5)   Proportionate share studies. Where a traffic impact analysis, water
study, wastewater study, drainage study has been required by these regulations
and accepted by the city in order to determine the proportionate costs of
facilities attributable to the development, participation by the city in the
costs of such facilities will be limited to the costs not attributable to
impacts from the subdivision.
   (C)   Developer/owner's responsibility.
      (1)   Improvements serving the development. The property owner or
developer shall be responsible for the entire costs of designing and installing
all public improvements that primarily serve the development. Facilities
required by these regulations shall be considered as primarily serving the
subdivision or addition unless otherwise determined by the city.
      (2)   Required oversized improvements. The property owner or developer
shall be responsible for their share of the costs of oversized or off-site
public improvements needed to ensure adequacy of public facilities and services
for the addition or subdivision, subject to participation and escrow policies
contained in this section.
      (3)   Extension of utilities. The property owner or developer shall be
responsible for extending streets, water, wastewater, or drainage facilities
off-site to their property in accordance with the Master Thoroughfare Plan,
Water/Waste Water Master Plans, or as required by the city to ensure adequacy
of public facilities.
   (D)   Limitations and exceptions. The city shall not participate, unless the
city determines it's in the best interest of the public, in the following cost:
      (1)   Those portions of the costs of any public improvements that
primarily serve the subdivision or addition;
      (2)   Costs of construction for streets built wider than called for in
the Master Thoroughfare Plan;
      (3)   Costs of streetlights, decorative finishes, or other similar
expenses; and
      (4)   Costs of retention/detention ponds or slope protection;
(Ord. 06-2021-29, passed 6-22-21)
§ 154.064 (RESERVED).
§ 154.065 ESCROW FUNDS.
   (A)   All escrow funds will be held jointly in the name of the city and the
property owner placing the funds in escrow; however, only the city may initiate
the withdrawal of funds.
   (B)   All interest earned will apply to the balance of escrow funds.
   (C)   Escrow monies will be acceptable in two forms:
      (1)   Cash will be placed in a passbook savings account.
      (2)   Certificate of deposit issued by any financial institution, which
is insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or Federal Savings and
Loan Insurance Corporation, shall be held in the city depository. The developer
shall execute four copies of a letter assigning the deposit to the city and
authorizing the city to withdraw the deposit when necessary to complete the
project. Such letter of assignment must be accepted in writing by the financial
institution.
      (3)   The escrow will be placed in an institution insured by either the
FDIC or FSLIC and the deposits shall not exceed the maximum FDIC or FSLIC
insured limits in any one lending institution.
   (D)   If the cost of construction is less than the funds in escrow, the city
will return any excess funds to the individual placing those funds in escrow.
   (E)   Present escrow funds. All escrow money deposited with the city prior
to the effective date of this policy shall remain on deposit under the original
escrow contract agreement.
('68 Code, App. B, § 4.06) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.066 ASSESSMENT PAVING POLICY.
   (A)   When a portion of the cost of paving is proposed to be assessed
against the property owners, the procedure to be followed shall be in
accordance with Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 1105b,
   (B)   At intersections, the city at large shall pay for the pro rated cost
of curb, gutter, and pavement.
   (C)   Individual consideration shall be given to property which does not
have access to all or any parts of the street being improved, with such cases
to be referred to the City Council for any special action that seems justified
regarding deviation from standard policies.
   (D)   Property owners shall pay the entire cost of streets paved to a
greater width than required by the city.
   (E)   Deviations from standard policy. Any deviation from standard policy as
stated and illustrated in this chapter or in any amendment thereto, or any
situation which is not covered in the standard policy, shall be called to the
attention of the City Council prior to, or during, the assessment paving
benefit hearing.
('68 Code, App. B, § 4.07) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.067 SURVEY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A permanent marker (at least five-eighths-inch steel, no less than 18
inches long) shall be set at each property corner, at beginning and ending of
each curve, at each angle, and block corner.
   (B)   To prevent permanent steel markers from being destroyed during
construction of community facilities within the development, the developer may
place markers at boundaries of the subdivision. All internal markers may be
placed after construction of community facilities.
   (C)   All surveys will be done by a surveyor.
   (D)   (1)   After the city establishes a monument system based on the Texas
Plane Coordinate System, and where the entire platted area is outside the one
half-mile radius around the nearest Cleburne monument, the surveyor shall do
the following:
         (a)   Install a Cleburne monument on the Second Order Class I as
defined by Specifications to Support Classification, Standards of Accuracy, and
General Specifications of Geodetic Control Surveys, as published by the Federal
Geodetic Control Committee.
         (b)   Provide an iron pipe with a bronze cap for all city required
monuments, bearing his name and surveyor's number. The surveyor shall place the
pipe and capina concrete post at least 12 inches in diameter. The concrete post
shall be at least two feet deep with the cap at ground level.
      (2)   The monument location, description, grid coordinates and elevation
based on the USGS datum shall be provided to the City Engineer with the
surveyors seal affixed to a letter.
   (E)   All plats subdividing three or more lots shall:
      (1)   Shall show the Texas Plane Coordinates of at least four diagonally
opposed corners of the subdivision, with scale and grid factors, monument used
and type of station used.
      (2)   Show bearings on the plat based on the Texas Plane Coordinate
System.
('68 Code, App. B, § 4.08) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.068 IMPACT FEES.
   The Land Use Assumptions and Capital Improvements Plan Report for Water,
Wastewater, and Roadway Impact Fee Study is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference.
(Ord. 10-2017-67, passed 10-24-17)
STREET AND RIGHT-OF-WAY REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.080 STREET AND RIGHT-OF-WAY DESIGN CRITERIA.
   The following shall govern the design of all street improvements within the
city:
   (A)   Side slopes should not be steeper than three horizontal to one
vertical within the limits of the dedicated right-of-way.
   (B)   The alignment and design of streets should be such that major
thoroughfares have a design speed of 40 miles per hour, collector, industrial
and commercial streets have a design speed of 35 miles per hour, and
residential streets have a design speed of 30 miles per hour.
   (C)   Horizontal alignments.
      (1)   The following minimum centerline radii shall be used in the design
of all street construction:
 
Type Street                         Minimum Radius
Collector, industrial or commercial 600 ft.
Local, residential                  200 ft.
 
      (2)   The minimum centerline radii for major thoroughfares shall comply
with AASHTO's A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, 1984,
Values for Superelevation Rate Related to Curvature on High Speed Highways for
e max = 0.06 ft./ft.
      (3)   Reverse circular curves having a common tangent shall be separated
by a tangent section in accordance with the following table:
 
Minimum Tangent
Type Street                         Between Curves
Major thoroughfare                  200 ft.
Collector, industrial or commercial 100 ft.
Local, residential                  50 ft.
 
      (4)   The minimum radius for the back of curb on a cul-de-sac shall be 50
feet.
      (5)   The minimum radius for curb returns at intersections shall be as
follows:
 
Type Street                                             Maximum Grade
Major thoroughfare, collector, industrial or commercial 30 ft.
Local, residential                                      15 ft.
 
      (6)   Streets shall conform to the comprehensive plan as adopted. Where
developer contends that such is not feasible, facts and data must be submitted
to, and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (D)   Vertical alignment.
      (1)   No streets shall be designed or constructed to a grade of less than
0.5 of 1%.
      (2)   No streets shall be designed or constructed with grades in excess
of the following:
 
Type Street                         Maximum Grade
Major thoroughfare                  6.0%
Collector, industrial or commercial 8.0%
Local, residential                  10.0%
 
      (3)   All streets within 50 feet of an intersection shall have a maximum
2% grade, with the following exceptions:
         (a)   On a major thoroughfare intersecting a collector or a local
street;
         (b)   On a collector street intersecting a local street.
      (4)   In order to maintain adequate sight distances, the following
minimum lengths of vertical curves shall be required:
 
Minimum Vertical
Type Street                         Curve Length
Major thoroughfare                  80 ft. for each algebraic percent
                                    difference in grade
Collector, industrial or commercial 60 ft. for each algebraic percent
                                    difference in grade
Local, residential                  50 ft. for each algebraic percent
                                    difference in grade
 
   (E)   Street widths and cross sections shall be per the Typical Sections
identified in the City's Master Thoroughfare Plan.
   (F)   Any newly constructed local street or minor collector of 1,000 linear
feet or more shall meet the following curvilinear requirements, unless
otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works:
      (1)   A minimum centerline deviation of 50 feet from the projected
straight line path between beginning and ending points of the street.
      (2)   A minimum of 40% of the length of the street must be on a curve.
      (3)   A maximum curve radius of 1,200 feet for local streets and 2,500
feet for collectors.
      (4)   The street must meet all requirements outlined in §
154.080.
      (5)   Developer/applicant shall provide an exhibit detailing how proposed
development meets the requirement for curvilinear streets prior to any plat
submittal.
('68 Code, App. B, § 5.01) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. 04-2022-40,
passed 4-26-22; Am. Ord. 01-2023-04, passed 1-24-23)
§ 154.081 FINAL ENGINEERING PLANS REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The developer shall employ an engineer for preparation of street
plans.
   (B)   Street plan and profiles shall be drawn on 24-inch by 36-inch plan
profile paper with a horizontal scale of 40 feet per inch and a vertical scale
of four feet per inch. Stationing will usually be from south to north, from
west to east, from southwest to northeast and from southeast to northwest. The
plan will be on the upper part of the sheet with the profile on the lower part
of the sheet. The title will be on the right end of the plan and profile sheet.
   (C)   (1)   The plan will show:
         (a)   Street property lines;
         (b)   Lot and block number with subdivision name and lot width
abutting street;
         (c)   Intersecting streets and widths;
         (d)   Curblines with width of paving (face to face of curb);
         (e)   Curb returns and valleys;
         (f)   Arrows showing the direction of water flow;
         (g)   Centerline stationing with front of curve (PC) and point of
tangent (PT) stationing and curve data;
         (h)   Relation of centerline stationing to intersecting streets; curb
inlets arid culverts; and
         (i)   Other pertinent features needed to show complete work.
      (2)   The profile will show the existing ground grade line for the
centerline and both property lines in free hand lines. All grades will be
clearly labeled. The top of curb grade will be shown for both sides of the
street with a ruled line. All curblines will be clearly labeled. The elevation
of curb streets will be shown and labeled. Elevation and station lines on
profile will be clearly marked. Curb grade elevations will be shown for each
station and half station.
   (D)   A plan of the entire section to be developed will show all of the
streets to be constructed, the valleys, the stormwater ditches, storm drain
systems, culverts and other items to be constructed. This map, at a preferred
scale of one inch equals 100 feet, will be based on the approved subdivision
plan.
('68 Code, App. B, § 5.02) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.082 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The city standard street specifications and the approved engineering
plans will govern all street construction.
   (B)   The streets, including parkways, shall be excavated to the line and
grade established in the approved plans. Any change in parkway grading will be
by written permission by the City Engineer.
   (C)   All necessary storm drain facilities shall be designed and installed
in accordance with §§
154.120 et seq. and city water and sewerage construction standards.
   (D)   All underground utilities and services to be located under the
pavement shall be completed, accepted and backfilled prior to the preparation
of the subgrade. This includes the water services constructed to a point four
feet behind the back of the curb, and the sewer services shall be constructed
to the property line. All trenches shall be backfilled in accordance with
standard city specifications.
   (E)   Curb and gutter shall be constructed on both sides of the street,
including intersections, on the line and grade established in the approved
plans, unless otherwise approved.
   (F)   Pavement, including concrete valleys and subdrains as required, shall
be constructed on all streets in accordance with the approved engineering plans
and the city standard street specifications.
   (G)   (1)   Underground utilities placed in rights-of-way or easements shall
be marked with plastic tape for any of the following reasons:
         (a)   The utility line carries gas, high voltage electricity, or
hazardous materials; or
         (b)   The utility company charges the excavator for the time the
utility is out of service due to damage done while excavating; or
         (c)   The utility line will be dedicated to the public and maintained
by the city. This includes water and sewer services.
      (2)   The tape shall be placed a minimum of one foot directly above the
utility and a maximum of two feet below the surface.
      (3)   Plastic marking tape shall be acid and alkali resistant
polyethylene film, three inches wide with minimum thickness of .004 inch. Tape
shall have a minimum strength of 1,750 psi lengthwise and 1,500 psi crosswise.
If the utility cannot be located with a metal detector at the surface, the tape
shall be manufactured with integral wires, foil backing or other means to
enable detection by a metal detector when the tape is buried up to three feet
deep.
      (4)   The tape shall be of a type specifically manufactured for marking
and locating underground utilities. The metallic core of the tape shall be
encased in a protective jacket or provided with other means to protect it from
corrosion.
      (5)   Tape color shall be as specified below and shall bear a continuous
printed inscription describing the specific utility. The city may give approval
to a franchise utility for an exception to the standard colors in order to
exhaust existing supplies.
      Tape Color      Utility
      Red         Electric
      Yellow         Gas, oil, dangerous materials
      Orange         Telephone, telegraph, television, police and fire
communications
      Blue         Water systems
      Green         Sewer systems
   (H)   All utilities in right-of-way and easements shall be located in
conformance with the “City of Cleburne Standard Locations for Utilities in
Street Right-of-Way” set forth in §
154.107 when possible.
('68 Code, App. B, § 5.03) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.083 DISTRIBUTION OF COSTS.
   (A)   The developer shall bear all the cost of street improvements including
subdrains, as required. If the developer constructs a wider street than
requested by the city, the developer shall pay the entire cost of the extra
width. However, in the event a street wider than 40 feet is constructed at the
city's request, upon approval by the City Council, the city may pay for the
cost of street improvements for the width in excess of 40 feet.
   (B)   On streets adjacent to city park property, and upon approval by the
City Council, the cost of the street improvements may be distributed as
follows:
      (1)   The city may pay for one-half of the curb, gutter and paving only
of the total street when a street is adjacent to a park and not in excess of 40
feet in width if funds are available.
      (2)   If the roadway is in excess of 40 feet in width, the city may also
pay for the cost of street improvements for the width in excess of 40 feet.
('68 Code, App. B, § 5.04) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.084 SIDEWALK REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this policy is to provide for the adequate
construction of pedestrian walkways within the city in order to promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the community.
   (B)   Sidewalk requirements. New development requires pedestrian elements on
the on both sides of a new roadway. Development adjacent to existing roadway
requires sidewalks if:
      (1)   Fronting a roadway designated on the master thoroughfare plan as a
non-local street; or
      (2)   Fronting a roadway where sidewalks exist on 50% or more of the
properties on the block face.
   (C)   Design standards.
      (1)   All sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet in width, except a
sidewalk located within or abutting a collector street, or larger, as shown on
the master thoroughfare plan, which shall not be less than five feet in width.
      (2)   All sidewalks and pathways shall be constructed in the area between
the curb or grade line of the public street and the abutting property line,
unless the pathway is situated within a dedicated pathway easement or right-of-
way. The edge of the sidewalk or pathway shall generally be parallel with the
curb line, and situated no more than one foot from the abutting property line.
The Director of Public Works may approve a plan to alter the location and size
of a sidewalk to preserve a tree or for aesthetic purposes. One additional foot
of width shall be added to a sidewalk that abuts a street curb.
      (3)   Sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete with a
minimum thickness of five inches. Pathway-system sidewalks shall be a minimum
thickness of five inches.
      (4)   Concrete for sidewalks and pathways shall:
         (a)   Be Class A;
         (b)   Consist of a minimum of five sacks of Portland cement for each
cubic yard of concrete mix;
         (c)   Have a seven-day flexural strength of 500 psi; and
         (d)   Have a 28-day compressive strength of 3,000 psi.
      (5)   Reinforcement shall be #4 steel deformed reinforcing bars on 18-
inch centers.
   (D)   Architectural Barriers Act. All sidewalk/street intersections shall be
constructed so as to provide a ramp that complies with the Architectural
Barriers Act and TDLR. Barrier-free ramps shall be provided for access to the
street.
   (E)   Waivers. A complete waiver of the requirement for the construction of
sidewalks for a specific development should be rare and allowed only where
there are unusual factors.
      (1)   Unusual factors include:
         (a)   Projects where the cost of establishing sidewalks or walkways
would be unreasonably disproportionate to the cost of the associated roadway
construction or overall project costs;
         (b)   Areas with severe topography or other natural constraints that
will constrain proper implementation of the required sidewalk;
         (c)   Situations inherently adverse to pedestrian activity, such as
harmful noise, dust creation, and high volume truck traffic, in certain areas,
such as agricultural, heavy commercial, and industrial developments; or
         (d)   Situations where an applicant can show other factors or
circumstances amounting to reasonably justifiable good cause to support such
waiver.
      (2)   The Public Works Director or designee shall make a determination as
to whether or not the waiver should be granted, and document that determination
with supporting data that states the basis for the decision.
   (F)   Appeal process. A denial of a request for a waiver of these
requirements may be appealed to the City Council.
      (1)   A written appeal must be filed with the Director of Public Works
within ten days of the denial.
      (2)   The appeal must provide justification for the requested waiver,
based on the established criteria stated above.
('68 Code, App. B, § 5.05) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. 01-2022-02,
passed 1-11-2022)
§ 154.085 STREET NAME AND TRAFFIC SIGNS.
   (A)   General requirement. Street name signs and traffic control signs shall
be required for all street intersections in accordance with the Texas Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Street signs shall be furnished and installed
by the developer at the time of other public infrastructure for all
intersections within or abutting the subdivision.
   (B)   Standards. All signs shall conform to the standards as set forth in
the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. All road identification
signs are to have a green background with white reflective lettering.
   (C)   Installation. The sign pole shall be buried to a minimum depth of two
feet and placed in a 12-inch diameter concrete filled posthole. The pole shall
be tall enough to accommodate all applicable signs.
   (D)   Approval. The developer shall submit a signage plan designed by a
licensed professional engineer in conjunction with the civil construction plans
for review by Director of Public Works prior to installation.
   (E)   Custom signs. The Director of Public Works may approve custom-made
street signs and custom-made sign poles, provided the city has executed a
written agreement with a party responsible for the maintenance and replacement
of such signs or sign poles.
('68 Code, App. B, § 5.06) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. 06-2022-46,
passed 6-14-22)
§ 154.086 STREET LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   As deemed necessary by the city, upon request of the developer (after
acceptance of the subdivision), the city may request the franchised electric
company to install standard overhead wood pole street lighting in dedicated
street rights-of-way. Any extra street lighting or nonstandard lighting will be
by contract between the developer and the franchised electric company, with
written approval of the city, i.e., underground wiring, ornamental poles,
additional lighting, and the like.
   (B)   All street lights installed in connection with any development project
shall remain the property of the franchised electric company.
   (C)   The city agrees to pay only for lights which the city requested be
installed in agreement with [the] current street lighting rate schedule
approved by the City Council and the franchised electric company.
   (D)   The developer shall furnish and/or dedicate all necessary easements
required for installation or transformers, guys and overhead or underground
wiring.
   (E)   All street lighting installations shall be in accordance with the
following requirements, and/or design criteria developed by the City Engineer
and/or the franchised electric company.
      (1)   A light shall be placed at every other street intersection when the
block is less than 600 feet in length unless deemed not necessary by the city.
      (2)   A light shall be installed at each intersection and any other
location required by the city when block is more than 600 feet long.
      (3)   A light shall be installed on a cul-de-sac when required by the
city.
      (4)   As a minimum standard, lamps of not less than 7,000 lumen shall be
installed.
      (5)   All lamps shall be sodium vapor or more efficient as determined by
the city.
('68 Code, App. B, § 5.07) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.087 ASSIGNED STREET BLOCK AND HOUSE NUMBERS.
   The city will assign the street block and house numbers. The builder is
responsible for installation of the house number.
('68 Code, App. B, § 5.08) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.088 DRIVEWAY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Residential construction. Residential driveway approaches shall be
constructed of six-inch-thick, 3,500-p.s.i-compressive-strength concrete,
reinforced with #3 steel bars on 18-inch centers each way, with #4 bars doweled
into the existing concrete paving. Residential driveways shall be constructed
with the return curbs having a rolled face disappearing at the sidewalk and
joining the street curb.
   (B)   Commercial and industrial construction. Commercial and industrial
driveway approaches shall be constructed of six-inch-thick, 3,500-p.s.i-
compressive-strength concrete, reinforced with #4 steel bars on 18-inch centers
each way, with #4 bars doweled into the existing concrete paving. Commercial
and industrial driveways shall be constructed with the return curbs having a
rolled face disappearing at the sidewalk and joining the street curb.
   (C)   Driveway approach depth. The driveway shall begin at the street curb
and extend to the property line. The drive approach shall be constructed such
that the height of the drive approach at the property ROW shall be two and one-
half inches higher than the top of the curb.
   (D)   Driveway approach widths and spacing. The criteria contained in the
following table shall be the minimum and/or maximum standards to be applied in
spacing and designing driveways on public streets. For the purpose of this
regulation, driveway width shall be measured at the property line. The Director
of Public Works may modify these standards, based on anticipated traffic flow
and in accordance with sound traffic engineering practices. To implement the
standards contained in the following table, subdivision plats for new
commercial developments shall be required to provide mutual access easement in
accordance with §
154.045.
DRIVEWAY SPACING AND DESIGN CRITERIA
Description Street Classification Residential Driveway Commercial Driveway
                                  Min. Max.            Min. Max.
DRIVEWAY SPACING AND DESIGN CRITERIA
Description          Street          Residential Driveway Commercial Driveway
                     Classification  Min. Max.            Min. Max.
                     Local           12'  25'             25'  35'
Driveway Throat      Minor Collector 12'  25'             25'  35'
Width                Major Collector 16   25'             25'  35'
                     Arterial        20'  25'             25'  35'
                     Local           5'   10'             10'  20'
Driveway Curb Radius Minor Collector 5'   10'             10'  20'
                     Major Collector 10'  10'             10'  20
                     Arterial        15'  15'             20'  30'
                     Local           22'  n/a             100' n/a
Driveway Spacing     Minor Collector 32'  n/a             100' n/a
(centerline)         Major Collector n/a* n/a             150' n/a
                     Arterial        n/a* n/a             250' n/a
Minimum Distance     Local           30'  n/a             75'  n/a
from Driveway to     Minor Collector 50'  n/a             100' n/a
Intersection         Major Collector 100' n/a             150' n/a
(pi to pi)           Arterial        100' n/a             180' n/a
*Direct access to major collector and arterial streets from a residential
dwelling established after the effective date of this code is prohibited,
unless specifically approved by the Public Works Director. An applicant may
appeal a decision of the Public Works Director to the City Council.
 
   (E)   Provision for joint approaches. Driveway approaches shall be located
entirely within the frontage of the premises they serve, except that joint or
cooperative driveways with adjoining property holders may be permitted by the
Director of Public Works. When a joint-drive approach is proposed by a
developer, the request must be made by all interested parties and/or all
property owners involved.
   (F)   Angle of driveway approach. The angle of the driveway approach with
the curb line shall be 90 degrees.
   (G)   Sidewalk to be removed. Where a driveway approach is to be built, any
existing sidewalk located within the proposed driveway location shall be
removed and the entire area replaced as a driveway. The drive approach shall
extend to the property line.
   (H)   Driveways crossing bar ditches.
      (1)   Culvert size. The minimum culvert pipe size shall be 18-inch
diameter. However, an engineered design that provides for a larger culvert pipe
size may be required by the developer, where the Director of Public Works
determines that additional drainage capacity may be required. Commercial
driveways shall have concrete safety ends installed on each end of the culvert.
      (2)   Radius. Driveways shall be constructed with the return curbs
joining the edge of pavement at the street with a minimum-ten-foot radius.
      (3)   Slope. The maximum slope from the edge of driveway to the top of
the culvert pipe shall be 6:1. The sloped area around the end of the culvert
pipe shall be sodded or hydro-mulched to resist erosion.
      (4)   Cross slope. The minimum cross slope of the culvert shall be one-
eighth-inch per foot.
      (5)   Maintenance. Future maintenance of the drive approach and culvert
pipe is the responsibility of the property owner.
      (6)   Grading. During the drive-approach installation, all ditch grading
upstream and downstream of the proposed driveway culvert is the responsibility
of the property owner.
   (I)   General.
      (1)   Driveway approaches at pedestrian crossings. Driveway approaches
shall not be located in street intersections or at established pedestrian
crossings.
      (2)   Driveway approaches at obstructions. Driveways shall be kept at a
minimum of five feet away from obstructions such as street light posts, fire
hydrants, traffic signals and the like.
      (3)   Accumulative width of approaches. Driveway approaches shall not
occupy more than 40% of the frontage of a lot or tract.
('68 Code, App. B, § 5.09) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. 06-1993-21,
passed 6-24-93; Am. Ord. 12-2021-67, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 154.089 OFF-SITE STREET CONSTRUCTION OR IMPROVEMENT.
   (A)   Generally. Any development shall have an adequate off-site street and
thoroughfare system that:
      (1)   Provides for streets in an appropriate location, of suitable design
and width, and with appropriate traffic control devices to accommodate existing
traffic, traffic anticipated from the development, and traffic anticipated from
other developments impacting the same streets;
      (2)   Affords satisfactory access to adjoining properties; and
      (3)   Accommodates police, firefighting, sanitation, and street
maintenance equipment.
   (B)   Access required. The subdivider shall acquire right-of-way and
necessary easements for the construction of any off-site streets necessary to
connect the subdivision with an adequate off-site street network.
      (1)   Any development with five or more lots shall have access to a
collector or major thoroughfare on a paved street with a design speed of 30
miles per hour.
      (2)   If existing streets do not provide access, the developer shall do
one of the following:
         (a)   Construct a new street which includes:
            1.   Acquisition and dedication of adequate right-of-way;
            2.   Designing the street in accordance with the street design
criteria of §
154.080; and
            3.   Constructing the street in accordance with the city standard
street specifications.
         (b)   Improve existing streets which includes:
            1.   An engineer's design to determine what work is required to
improve the existing street for a design speed of 30 miles per hour;
            2.   Submitting the engineer's design to the City Engineer for
approval; and
            3.   Constructing the required improvements in accordance with the
approved design and the city standard street specifications.
   (C)   Adequacy required. Before plat approval and in conjunction with the
rough proportionality determination under §
154.028, the City Engineer shall determine whether the existing or proposed
roadway network, including perimeter streets, which will serve the subdivision
has adequate capacity to accommodate existing traffic, traffic reasonably
anticipated from the subdivision, and traffic reasonably anticipated from other
developments approved or to be approved within a reasonable period. The city's
determination shall be based on information provided by the applicant and
applicant's engineer in the plat application and any supporting studies.
   (D)   Traffic study, traffic impact analysis, and mitigation.
      (1)   Purpose. A traffic study and a traffic impact analysis (TIA) is
intended to adequately assess the traffic-related impacts of a zoning and/or
development proposal on the existing and planned thoroughfare system. The
purpose of this division is to:
         (a)   Provide the safest and most efficient transportation system in
conjunction with the development review process;
         (b)   Inform the applicant of the city’s requirements and
expectations;
         (c)   Provide standard guidelines for the preparation and review of a
traffic study and a traffic impact analysis (TIA); and
         (d)   Establish equitable mitigation measures for the accommodation of
identified impacts.
      (2)   Applicability of requirements.
         (a)   A traffic study is required for zoning requests when:
            1.   The proposed zoning request will generate over 50 trips during
the peak hour; or
            2.   The proposed zoning request will generate over 500 trips per
day for residential traffic; or
            3.   The proposed zoning request will generate over 1,000 trips per
day for commercial traffic.
         (b)   A traffic impact analysis (TIA) is required for all plats when:
            1.   The proposed subdivision consists of 100 or more dwelling
units.
            2.   The proposed subdivision generates over 100 trips during peak
hours.
            3.   The proposed subdivision generates over 1,000 trips per day.
         (c)   Special circumstances. A traffic study and traffic impact
analysis (TIA) may also be required for zoning and development applications if
one or more of the following conditions exist:
            1.   City Council determines that additional information beyond the
required submittals is needed to determine the impacts of the proposed
development on the transportation system.
            2.   Traffic generated from a non-residential development will
significantly impact adjacent residential neighborhoods.
            3.   Traffic operational impacts such as conflicts with driveways,
left or right turns, signal timing, median openings or sight distance are
anticipated. In such cases the study will only be required to answer questions
related to the specific impacts.
            4.   Existing traffic conflicts on adjacent streets are expected to
worsen due to traffic generated from the new development.
            5.   Implementation of the Master Thoroughfare Plan in the area
will not occur prior to development of the property.
            6.   The proposed land use differs significantly from that
contemplated in the adopted Comprehensive Plan.
            7.   The internal street or access system is not anticipated to
accommodate the expected traffic generation.
      (3)   Study submission requirements.
         (a)   Timing of submittals. If required, a study shall be submitted to
the city in accordance with the following:
            1.   Zoning cases. The traffic study shall be submitted no later
than the submission of the zoning case application.
            2.   Subdivision plats. The traffic impact analysis (TIA) shall be
submitted no later than the submission of the first plat application.
         (b)   Content requirements. The traffic study and the traffic impact
analysis for zoning and development applications shall comply with the
following methodology and be formatted as outlined in this section.
            1.   Traffic study.
               a.   Site location/study area. A brief description of the size,
general features, and location of the site, including a map of the site in
relation to the study area and surrounding vicinity;
               b.   Proposed zoning/site development. A description of the
proposed zoning/development for the site, including land area by zoning
classification and density, square footage and number of dwelling units (as
appropriate);
               c.   Existing site trip generation. A table displaying trip
generation rates and total trips generated by land use category for the A.M.
and P.M. peak hours and on a daily basis, assuming full development and
occupancy based on existing zoning (if applicable);
               d.   Proposed site trip generation. A table displaying trip
generation rates and total trips generated by land use category for the A.M.
and P.M. peak hours and on a daily basis, assuming full development and
occupancy for the proposed development. The city's standard for trip generation
rates for various land use categories shall be those found in the latest
edition of Trip Generation published by the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE) or other published or recognized sources applicable to the
region;
               e.   Net change in trip generation (zoning). Possible trip
generation minus existing trip generation and proposed trip generation minus
existing trip generation (if applicable);
            2.   Traffic impact analysis (TIA) shall be prepared under the
direction of an engineer with experience in transportation engineering and
shall include:
               a.   All requirements of a traffic study;
               b.   Existing zoning. A description of the existing zoning for
the site and adjacent property, including land area by zoning classification
and density, square footage the number of dwelling units (as appropriate);
               c.   Existing development. A description of any existing
development on the site and adjacent to the site and how it would be affected
by the development proposal;
               d.   Thoroughfare system. A description and map of existing
planned or proposed thoroughfares and traffic signals for horizon year(s)
within the study area;
               e.   Existing traffic volumes. Recent traffic counts for
existing thoroughfares and major intersections within the study area;
               f.   Projected traffic volumes. Horizon year(s) background
traffic projections for the planned thoroughfare system within the study area;
               g.   Trip distribution and traffic assignment. Tables and
figures of trips generated by the proposed development (or net change in trips,
if applicable) added to the existing and projected volumes, as appropriate,
with distribution and assignment assumptions;
               h.   Level of service evaluations. Capacity analyses for weekday
A.M. and P.M. peak hours of the roadway and peak hour of the site, if different
from the roadway, for both existing conditions and horizon year projections for
intersections, thoroughfare links, median openings and turn lanes associated
with the site, as applicable. The minimum acceptable level of service (LOS)
within the city shall be defined as LOS "C" in peak hours for all critical
movements and links. All development impacts on both thoroughfare and
intersection operations must be measured against this standard;
               i.   Traffic signal evaluations. The need for new signals based
on warrants, the impact on transportation system performance;
               j.   Evaluation of proposed/necessary mitigation. Capacity
analyses for weekday A.M. and P.M. peak hours of the roadway and peak hour of
the site, if different from the roadway, for intersections, thoroughfare links,
median openings and turn lanes associated with the site under proposed/
necessary traffic mitigation measures;
               k.   Conclusions. Identification of all thoroughfares,
driveways, intersections, and individual movements that exceed LOS D, degrade
by one or more LOS, the percentage of roadway volume change produced by the
proposed development, and any operational problems likely to occur;
               l.   Recommendations. Proposed impact mitigation measures
consistent with this section; and
               m.   Other information required for proper review. As requested
by the city's Director of Public Works or designated representative.
         (c)   Report format. The various sections of the report should be
categorized according to the subject areas below:
            1.   Traffic study.
               a.   Introduction (site location, proposed development).
               b.   Trip generation table (including existing trip generation,
proposed trip generation, net change).
            2.   Traffic impact analysis (TIA).
               a.   Executive summary (key findings, recommendations).
               b.   Introduction (proposed development, study purpose, and
methodology).
               c.   Existing conditions (study area roadway network, adjacent
roadway classifications, existing land use, existing traffic volumes, analysis
of existing conditions, project specific conditions).
               d.   Trip generation and distribution (proposed development,
trip generation, adjusted trips, trip distribution).
               e.   Pre and post development comparative analysis (background
traffic conditions, background levels of service, built traffic conditions,
built levels of service, total traffic with mitigation measures – levels of
service).
               f.   Conclusions (expand on executive summary, key findings,
recommendations).
               g.   List of all tables.
               h.   List of all figures.
               i.   Appendices.
      (4)   Mitigation. Mitigation of impacts identified during a traffic
impact analysis (TIA) shall be required when the proposed development would
cause a facility or traffic movement to fall below a LOS C, or the traffic
facility or movement is already is below a LOS C and the development would
contribute 5% or more of the total traffic during built conditions, or the
traffic impact analysis (TIA) recommends mitigation measures. If mitigation is
required, the applicant must mitigate the impact of the proposed development,
and would not be responsible for alleviating any deficiencies in the
thoroughfare system that may occur without the proposed development. Acceptable
mitigation measures include but are not limited to:
         (a)   Staging of development in order to relate site development to
the construction of the required thoroughfare system;
         (b)   Off-site improvements, including the provision of right-of-way
and/or the participation in funding for needed thoroughfare and intersection
improvement projects; and
         (c)   On-site improvements, including access controls and site
circulation adjustments.
   (E)   Effect of adequacy determination. If this section requires the
submission of a traffic study and the adequacy determination for roadways
indicates that the off-site roadway network serving the proposed subdivision is
inadequate, the subdivider shall execute a community facilities agreement with
the city to ensure the roadways are adequate to accommodate the impacts of the
subdivision. The agreement may include a joint participation agreement under §
154.063 or an escrow of funds for future construction under §
154.065.
   (F)   Phasing. If the property to be developed is intended as a phase in a
larger subdivision or constitutes a portion of the property to be ultimately
developed, the city may require a demonstration of adequacy for additional
phases as a condition of approval of the proposed plat.
('68 Code, App. B, § 5.10) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. 06-2019-32,
passed 6-11-19; Am. Ord. 08-2023-60, passed 8-22-23)
§ 154.090 PRIVATE STREETS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish regulations for
subdivisions with privately owned streets.
   (B)   Authority. The regulations contained in this section have been adopted
under the following authority:
      (1)   Chapter 212 - Municipal Regulation of Subdivisions and Property
Development of the Texas Loc. Gov’t Code, which authorizes a municipality to
adopt rules governing plats and subdivisions of land within the municipality's
jurisdiction.
      (2)   Chapter 51 - General Powers of Municipalities of the Texas Loc.
Gov’t Code, which authorizes a municipality to adopt ordinances, rules, or
police regulations that are for the good government, peace, or the trade and
commerce of the municipality.
      (3)   The Home Rule Charter of the City of Cleburne, Texas, which
authorizes the City Council to exercise all powers granted to municipalities by
the Constitution or the laws of the State of Texas.
   (C)   Applicability. The regulations contained in this section shall be
applicable to any proposed subdivision plat, to any petition to convert a
public street to a private street, and to any petition to convert a private
street to a public street submitted to the city after May 1, 2024.
   (D)   Requirements for subdivisions.
      (1)   Planning considerations. The following criteria shall be used as
guidelines in the review and approval of a private street subdivision.
         (a)   Streets shown on the adopted Thoroughfare Plan of the city must
not be used, maintained, or constructed as private streets.
         (b)   A subdivision with private streets and alleys must not impede or
cross an existing or proposed street as shown on the city's most recent
Thoroughfare Plan or approved preliminary or final plats.
         (c)   A subdivision with private streets must not disrupt or
disconnect an existing or proposed city public pedestrian pathway, hike and
bike trail, or park as shown on the city's most recent Park Plan.
         (d)   The perimeter of a subdivision with private streets must include
a minimum of 80 feet of contiguous frontage upon a public street.
         (e)   The proposed subdivision with private streets must be zoned for
residential purposes and contain 25 single-family lots or greater.
         (f)   The proposed subdivision must not negatively affect traffic
circulation on public streets outside of the subdivision.
         (g)   The proposed subdivision must not negatively impair access to
on-site or off-site properties or future developments.
         (h)   The proposed subdivision must not negatively impair access to or
from public facilities, such as schools, parks and libraries, etc.
         (i)   The proposed subdivision must not negatively impact the response
time of emergency vehicles.
      (2)   Construction of private streets and drainage infrastructure.
         (a)   Private street lot. Private streets must be constructed within a
separate lot owned by the HOA. This lot must conform to the city's standards
for public street right-of-way. An easement covering the street lot must be
granted to the city providing the right to enter for purposes of maintaining
the public infrastructure and utilities and an access easement for exercising
governmental services, including but not limited to fire and police protection,
inspection and code enforcement. The right to use the street lot for utilities
shall extend to all utility providers, including telecommunication companies
operating within the city. The easement shall permit the city to remove any
vehicle or obstacle within the private street lot that impairs emergency
access.
         (b)   Street, sidewalk and drainage design and construction standards.
Private streets, drainage systems, and sidewalks must conform to the same
design and construction standards for the design and construction of public
streets, drainage systems, and sidewalks.
         (c)   Traffic signs. All traffic regulatory signs along private
streets must conform to the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and
be maintained by the Homeowner's Association ("HOA").
         (d)   Plans and inspections. Proposed subdivision with private streets
must submit to the city the same plans and engineering information required to
construct public streets, utilities and related appurtenances. Requirements
pertaining to inspection and approval of improvements prior to the city's
acceptance of the subdivision shall apply. Fees charged for these services
shall also apply. The city shall have the right to inspect the private streets
and related appurtenances at any time, and require the HOA to provide the
repairs needed to ensure emergency access. The City Council shall be the final
judge of whether such repairs are needed.
         (e)   No cost to city. The city shall not pay for any portion of the
cost of constructing the street and drainage infrastructure in the subdivision.
      (3)   Maintenance of private streets and drainage infrastructure.
         (a)   The HOA for the subdivision shall be responsible for the
maintenance of all streets and drainage infrastructure in the subdivision. The
city shall not pay for any portion of the cost of maintaining the streets and
drainage improvements in the subdivision.
         (b)   The city shall have authority to inspect all streets, drainage
facilities, and related appurtenances in the subdivision on a periodic basis to
determine the need for repairs to the infrastructure. If the city finds the
streets or drainage infrastructure in need of repairs, the HOA shall repair all
drainage and street facilities upon receipt of a notice of deficiency from the
city. If the HOA disagrees with the city's determination, the HOA may appeal
the determination as provided in division (E) of this section. If the HOA fails
to timely make repairs to the street and drainage infrastructure, the city may,
in its sole discretion, complete the needed repairs and assess the properties
in the subdivision for the costs.
      (4)   Public infrastructure. Water and sanitary sewer infrastructure
shall be constructed in accordance with city standards and dedicated to the
city. All water and sanitary sewer infrastructure shall be installed within a
public easement granted over the private street lot.
      (5)   Access standards.
         (a)   Restricted access allowed. The HOA may construct and maintain
guard houses, access control gates, and cross arms constructed in accordance
with the requirements of this section. All restricted access entrances must be
manned 24 hours every day, unless an alternative means of access to the
subdivision is provided for the city and other utility service providers. If
the HOA fails to provide an adequate method of access for the city or other
utility service providers, the city shall have the right to remove any gate or
other device that is a barrier to access to the subdivision, and the city may
assess the properties in the subdivision for the costs.
         (b)   Restricted access entrance design standards. Any private street
which has an access control gate or cross arm must have a minimum uninterrupted
pavement width of 24 feet at the location of the access control device. If an
overhead barrier is used, it must have a minimum height above the road surface
as required by the Fire Code for fire lanes. The design of all gates, cross
arms and access control devices, including automatic opening systems and manual
backup systems must be approved by the city prior to installation. The gates,
cross arms and opening devices must be tested and accepted by the city prior to
being put into operation. Gate designs may incorporate one or two gate sections
to meet the required minimum width of 24 feet. If the entrance is to
incorporate a median, guard shack, or similar structure that necessitates a
divided gate arrangement, the gate and street pavement widths may be reduced if
approved by the city, but in no case shall any single gate or street pavement
have a clear opening of less than 18 feet in width. All restricted access
entrances shall be equipped with the Knox Rapid Access System opening system.
The system shall be maintained by the HOA in good working condition at all
times. Any restricted access entrance that has an access control gate or cross
arm that requires residents to stop before gaining access must be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from the boundary of the subdivision to provide for
automobile queuing, unless a traffic study shows that a larger setback is
required to provide sufficient vehicle queuing. Restricted access entrances
equipped with an electronic opener that allows residents to remotely open the
control access gate or cross arm and enter the subdivision without having to
stop are exempted from this requirement. A sign must be erected at any
restricted access entrance that does not meet the requirements for a visitor
entrance to indicate that it is for resident use only and not for visitors.
         (c)   Visitor entrance design standards. At least one entrance per
subdivision with private streets must be equipped for visitor access. An
entrance for visitor access must comply with all of the standards for a
restricted access entrance in division (D)(5)(b) above. An entrance for visitor
access must be equipped with a call or code box to allow visitors to call-in
for access. The call or code box must be located at least 50 feet from the
boundary of the subdivision to allow sufficient room for automobile queuing.
The city reserves the right to require the developer or the HOA installing the
visitor entrance to provide a detailed study to determine if the traffic
generated by the proposed development will warrant a larger setback to ensure
sufficient vehicle queuing space. A turn-around space with a minimum outside
radius of 30 feet must be located between any call or code box and access
control gate or cross arm to allow vehicles denied access to safely exit onto
public streets in a "head out" position. A sign must be erected next to the
edge of such turn around space to prohibit vehicle parking in such space.
      (6)   Homeowners associations required. A subdivision developed with
private street and drainage infrastructure must have a mandatory HOA which
includes all properties served by the private streets. The HOA shall own and be
responsible for the maintenance of the private street and drainage
infrastructure. The HOA's creation documents must:
         (a)   Provide that the streets and drainage systems within the
development are private, owned and maintained by the HOA, and that the city has
no obligation to maintain the private streets and drainage systems;
         (b)   Be filed of record prior to the approval of the final plat;
         (c)   Provide that lot deeds must convey membership in the HOA and
provide for the payment of dues and assessments required by the HOA;
         (d)   Provide that the city has authority to inspect all streets,
drainage facilities, and related appurtenances in the subdivision on a periodic
basis to determine the need for repairs, that the HOA must repair all
infrastructure that the city determines to be in need of repair, that if the
HOA fails to timely make the repairs the city may perform the necessary repairs
and assess the properties in the subdivision for the costs;
         (e)   Provide that if the HOA fails to provide and maintain an
adequate method of access for the city and other utility services providers,
the city shall have the right to remove any gate or other device that is a
barrier to access to the subdivision and may assess the properties in the
subdivision for the costs;
         (f)   Provide that the HOA must not be dissolved without the prior
written consent of the city;
         (g)   Provide that no portion of the HOA's documents pertaining to the
maintenance of the private streets and assessments thereto shall be amended
without the written consent of the city;
         (h)   Provide that the HOA, as owner of the private streets and
appurtenances, agrees to release, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city,
its officers, agents, licensees, servants and employees, from and against any
and all claims or suits for property damage or loss and/or personal injury,
including death, to any and all persons, of whatsoever kind of character,
whether real or asserted, arising out of or in connection with, directly or
indirectly: 1) the reasonable use of the private streets, emergency access,
utility easements, entrance gate or structure by the city, its officers,
agents, licensees, servants and employees; 2) the condition of the private
streets, private street lights, private entrance gates or structures, private
walls or fences, private pedestrian access, private storm drainage systems and
emergency access; or 3) any use of the subdivision with private streets by the
city, its officers, agents, licensees, servants and employees for any purpose
related to the exercise of a governmental function or service, whether or not
caused, in whole or in part, by alleged negligence of officers, agents,
servants, employees, contractors, subcontractors, licensees or invitees of
city. The HOA shall be responsible for carrying liability insurance to meet the
requirements in this division; and
         (i)   Be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney to ensure that
they conform to this and other applicable city policies prior to being filed of
record at the county, and the developer of a new subdivision shall pay for the
cost of the City Attorney's review.
      (7)   Plat requirements. The following plat dedication certificate and
conditions of approval must be provided in all final plats for subdivisions
with private streets at time of submission.
         (a)   Plat dedication certificate.
            NOW, THEREFORE, KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENT:
            THAT ____________________, acting by and through the undersigned,
its duly authorized agent, does hereby adopt this plat designating the
hereinabove described real property as ____________, an addition to the City of
Cleburne, Johnson County, Texas, and does hereby dedicate to the public's use
the emergency access and utility easements shown thereon subject to the
conditions of approval stated herein.
            WITNESS MY HAND at Cleburne, Johnson County, Texas, this
___________ day of ______, 20___.
            ___________________
            (provide name and title)
         (b)   Conditions of approval.
            1.   Lot X, Block X denotes the private access and private drainage
easement owned by the HOA of _______________. No building permit will be issued
for Lot 1, Block A.
            2.   The landowners and any subsequent owners of lots shown herein
(the lot owners), jointly and severally, shall be responsible and liable for
the construction, operation and maintenance of any private common areas or
facilities in the addition created herein (the addition), including but not
limited to private streets, private entrance gates or structures, private walls
and fences, private pedestrian access, private storm drainage systems, private
lake, private open space and landscaping, and emergency access.
            3.   The HOA shall be established by the subdivider or developer to
operate and/or maintain the aforementioned private common areas or facilities.
            4.   The city shall not be responsible for maintaining any of the
aforementioned private common areas or facilities. The city will maintain only
the public water and sanitary sewer systems in utility easements accepted by
the city.
            5.   The HOA, lot owners, and landowners shall not seek maintenance
from the city except for the aforementioned public water and sanitary sewer
systems in utility easements accepted by the city.
            6.   Any public utility entities, including the city, shall have
the right at all times of ingress and egress to and from and upon the utility
easements shown herein for the purpose of construction, reconstruction,
inspection, patrolling, maintaining, and adding to or removing all or part of
its respective systems. Except for private storm drainage systems, private
streets and related entrance gates or structures that are approved by the city,
no buildings, fences, structures, trees, shrubs, or other improvements or
growths shall be constructed or placed upon, or across said public utility
easements. Any public utility entity, including the city, shall have the right
to remove and keep removed all or parts of any buildings, fences, structures,
trees, shrubs, or other improvements or growths which may in any way endanger
or interfere with its respective systems within said utility easements.
            7.   The city shall have the right at all times to remove and keep
removed any vehicle or obstacle that impairs emergency access in the emergency
access easements shown herein.
            8.   Any governmental entities, including the city, shall have the
right at all times of ingress and egress to and from and upon the private
access easements shown herein for any reasonable purpose related to the
exercise of a governmental service or function.
            9.   If the HOA or lot owners fail to maintain reliable access to
any public utility or governmental entities for purposes stated hereinabove,
the city may enter the addition and remove any entrance gate or structure which
is a barrier to access at the sole expense of the HOA or lot owners on a pro-
rata share formula.
            10.   The construction, reconstruction or repair of any private
streets within the addition must meet the approval of the Director of Public
Works and comply with the specifications of the city for public streets at the
time of construction, reconstruction or repair. The construction,
reconstruction or repair of any entrance gate and structure for the addition
must meet the approval of the Engineering Department and Fire Department of the
city.
            11.   The installation or replacement of all traffic regulatory
signs along the private streets must conform to the Texas Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices.
            12.   The HOA and lot owners agree to release, indemnify, defend
and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, licensees, servants and
employees, from and against any and all claims or suits for property damage or
loss and/or personal injury, including death, to any and all persons, of
whatsoever kind of character, whether real or asserted, arising out of or in
connection with, directly or indirectly: (a) the reasonable use of the private
streets, emergency access, utility easements, entrance gate or structure by the
city, its officers, agents, licensees, servants and employees; (b) the
condition of the private streets, private entrance gates or structures, private
walls and fences, private pedestrian access, private storm drainage systems and
emergency access; or (c) any use of the addition by the city, its officers,
agents, licensees, servants and employees for any purpose stated hereinabove,
whether or not caused, in whole or in part, by alleged negligence or officers,
agents, servants, employees, contractors, subcontractors, licensees or invitees
of the city. The HOA shall be responsible for carrying liability insurance to
meet the requirements in this division.
   (E)   Appeals. The City Council shall have authority to hear and determine
any appeals requested under this section:
      (1)   In order to request an appeal under this section, a written request
must be submitted to the city within 15 days of the receipt of the written
determination. The written request for an appeal must include the mailing
address for the person requesting the appeal.
      (2)   If an appeal is properly requested under division (E)(1), the city
shall set a public hearing before the City Council to hear and make a decision
on the appeal within 30 days. Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to
the person that requested the appeal. After the public hearing, the City
Council shall make a determination on the issues that is the subject of the
appeal. The City Council's determination shall be final.
   (F)   Existing streets.
      (1)   Petition to convert to public streets.
         (a)   A petition may be submitted to the city to accept private
streets as public streets and rights-of-way. The petition must include the
notarized signature of 100% of the owners of real property that is served by
the private streets.
         (b)   The city shall not be obligated to accept the private streets as
public, but the City Council may, in its sole discretion, choose to accept the
private streets as public. If the City Council chooses to accept the private
streets, the City Council may place such conditions on the acceptance as the
City Council finds to be appropriate.
         (c)   Upon receipt of a petition under this division and prior to
consideration of the petition by the City Council, the city may inspect the
private streets and drainage infrastructure and estimate the cost for repairing
the private streets and drainage infrastructure to be in compliance with the
requirements of this section and for removing gates, guard houses, access
control devices, landscaping or other amenities located within the private
street lot. The petitioners or the HOA for the petitioners shall be required to
contract with the city for payment of 100% of the city's estimated expenses as
a condition of acceptance of the private streets as public.
      (2)   Petition to convert to private streets.
         (a)   A petition may be submitted to the city to convert public
streets to private streets within a subdivision. The petition must be
accompanied by the notarized signatures of 100% of the owners of real property
in the subdivision that would be served by the private streets indicating
approval. A petition under this division must include an analysis of the long-
term maintenance and reconstruction obligation for the subdivision, prepared
and stamped by a private engineering firm, evidencing the ability of the HOA to
maintain the street and drainage infrastructure in the subdivision.
         (b)   A subdivision petitioning to have private streets must comply
with all the requirements of this section.
         (c)   The city shall not be obligated to convert public streets to
private streets, but the City Council may, in its sole discretion, choose to
grant the petition and convert the public streets to private street. If the
City Council chooses to grant the petition, the City Council may place such
conditions on the granting of the petition as the City Councils finds to be
appropriate.
      (3)   Procedure.
         (a)   City Council approval required. A petition filed under this
division (F) must be approved by the City Council after a public hearing. The
city must provide written notice of the public hearing to all owners of real
property situated within 200 feet of any of the property that is or will be
served by the private streets, as shown on the last approved city tax roll. The
notice should be mailed not less than ten days before the day set for the
public hearing. The notice may be served by depositing letters properly
addressed and postage paid in the United States Post Office in the city. The
city must also publish notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city no later than 15 days prior to the day of the public
hearing.
         (b)   Variances. In considering a petition under this division (F),
the City Council shall have authority to waive or modify a regulation under
this section if there is an extraordinary hardship or practical difficulties
that arise from the strict enforcement of this section and the waiver or
modification will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare
or injurious to other real property.
(Ord. 04-2024-25, passed 4-23-24)
WATER AND SANITARY SEWER REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.100 WATER AND SANITARY SEWER DESIGN CRITERIA.
   All water and sewer systems installed for any development shall be
constructed in conformance to the city standard utility specifications set
forth in this subchapter.
   (A)   General utility requirements.
      (1)   The developer shall be responsible for the design, construction and
installation of water and sanitary sewer infrastructure required to serve the
development including, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Phasing of development or improvements in order to maintain
adequate water and wastewater services.
         (b)   Extensions of utility lines (including any necessary on-site and
off-site lines) to connect to existing utility mains of adequate capacity.
         (c)   Providing and/or procuring all necessary easements for the
utilities (whether on-site or off-site).
         (d)   Providing proof to the city of adequate water and wastewater
service before final plans are accepted. A water and/or wastewater study,
including:
            1.   Adequate engineering data to support all water demand
projections;
            2.   Peak wet weather wastewater discharge including maximum
expected infiltration and inflows along with a flow peaking factor;
            3.   An analysis of the existing system, owned and maintained by
the city, for available capacity, shall be required for all industrial,
commercial, institutional developments. Residential developments with five or
more dwelling units shall also be required to provide a water and/or wastewater
study. The water and wastewater study shall be performed and sealed by a
licensed professional civil engineer licensed in the State of Texas.
         (e)   Providing for future expansion of the utilities if such will be
needed to serve future developments, subject to the city's policies, if
applicable.
         (f)   Providing all operations and maintenance of the private
utilities, or providing proof that a separate entity will be responsible for
the operations and maintenance of the utilities.
         (g)   Providing all fiscal security required for the construction of
the utilities.
         (h)   Obtaining approvals from applicable utility providers if other
than the city.
         (i)   Complying with all requirements of the utility providers,
including the city.
      (2)   Extension of water and wastewater lines shall be made along the
entire frontage of the subdivision adjacent to a street in rights-of-way or
dedicated easements in accordance with the city's Water and Wastewater Master
Plans.
         (a)   If the subdivision is not adjacent to a street, the extension of
utilities shall be to the edge of the subdivision's perimeter property line
adjoining any undeveloped property or accomplished in such a manner as to allow
future connections to said utilities by new subdivisions.
         (b)   If new subdivisions are not likely to be developed beyond the
proposed subdivision (due to physical constraints, service agreements, or
watershed boundaries), the Director of Public Works may waive the requirement
for adjacent utility line construction at the time of preliminary plat approval
and prior to construction of the subdivision. Easements for future expansion
may still be required.
         (c)   The city shall determine the location and routing of water and
sewer extensions and shall retain the authority to reject any extension not
deemed to be in the best interest of the city.
      (3)   All public water and sewer facilities shall be located in the
public right-of-way where possible. When not in the right-of-way, the public
facilities shall be located in a utility easement.
      (4)   Utility easements shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide. Wider
easements shall be required where lines exceed eight feet in depth, where other
utilities exist nearby, where lines function as transmission mains, or where
necessary for adequate access for maintenance. Utility easements, for utilities
installed at depths greater than eight feet, should be a minimum of three times
wider than the depth of installation centered on the utility unless otherwise
approved in writing by the Director of Public Works.
      (5)   Easements must be accessible from a public roadway or access
easement, or through a dedicated "utility access easement."
      (6)   Water or sanitary sewer service lines shall not cross any adjacent
lot. The public main shall be extended so as not to require the service to
extend across another lot.
      (7)    Public water and sewer mains adjacent to federal, state, or county
roadways shall be constructed outside the right-of-way in a separate easement
unless otherwise agreed by those agencies and the city.
      (8)   City owned water meter boxes, water service lines, sanitary sewer
service lines, sanitary sewer service clean outs, fire hydrants and sanitary
sewer manholes shall not be located in driveways, gutter pans or sidewalks.
Water meter boxes, water service lines, sanitary sewer service lines and
sanitary sewer service line clean outs that fall within a driveway, gutter pan
or sidewalk shall be relocated with all cost associated with the relocation
borne by the developer.
   (B)   Water system.
      (1)   The developer of a subdivision shall be required to install, at no
cost to the city, a water distribution system adequate for domestic supply and
for fire protection needs which serves each lot.
      (2)   All new subdivisions shall be connected with the city's water
system or other public water supply system such as Johnson County Special
Utility District or other system approved by TCEQ.
         (a)   When the water facilities fall under the jurisdiction of a
provider other than the city, a letter from the water service provider, stating
there are adequate facilities available to provide domestic service and fire
protection, is required.
      (3)   The design and construction of a water system shall, at a minimum,
comply with the following standards:
         (a)   Applicable regulations of the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality (TCEQ).
         (b)   The city's design, engineering and construction standards.
         (c)   Fire protection and suppression standards in accordance with the
city's policies and ordinances including Fire Code adopted by the city.
      (4)   General design and construction requirements.
         (a)   Pressure Planes. The connection to the appropriate water
pressure plane shall be noted on the plans at the location of connection to the
City Water Distribution System.
         (b)   No water system shall be constructed unless all plans have been
reviewed and released for construction by the city to assure compliance with
these requirements.
         (c)   All newly created lots are required to have their own water
service tap.
         (d)   All new waterlines shall be constructed as "looped" waterlines
whenever possible.
         (e)   Water lines located in cul-de-sacs shall be looped through lots
and connected to another water line to avoid dead-end lines.
         (f)   Dead-end water lines should be avoided, but when deemed
necessary, they should be extended to, and then through, the property sought to
be subdivided to allow for a future connection. Dead-end lines shall not exceed
600 feet, unless approved by the Director of Public Works.
         (g)   All dead-end lines shall have a fire hydrant assembly installed
at the extreme end of the line.
         (h)   New water lines crossing existing streets shall be placed by
boring. A casing shall be required under roadways classified as collector or
above (including minor collectors). Open cut excavation will not be allowed to
cross existing streets, unless approved by the Director of Public Works.
         (i)   Along state highways, water lines are required on both sides of
the roadway.
         (j)   Water lines for multi-family, commercial and industrial fire
protection lines shall be dedicated to the public, unless the system is
isolated from the public system by a backflow prevention device.
         (k)   Fire hydrant coverage shall be in accordance with the standards
of the International Fire Code and all other applicable requirements. The fire
hydrant layout and installation shall meet the following requirements:
            1.   All structures in residential areas shall have fire hydrants
within 400 feet as measured along an improved roadway.
             2.   All structures in commercial and industrial areas shall have
fire hydrants within 300 feet as measured along an improved roadway.
            3.   The Fire Marshal shall have the authority to require
additional fire hydrants be installed, when needed to provide adequate fire
protection.
            4.   Fire hydrants shall be located on both sides of the street
when the street is classified as a minor arterial or larger on the Master
Thoroughfare Plan, or when the street has a raised median of any type.
            5.   All fire hydrants shall be painted silver (Polane Silver-
Sherwin Williams part number F63SL5 or equivalent).
            6.   Bollards shall be required around fire hydrants located in
undeveloped areas.
            7.   Hydrant markers shall be provided for hydrants located in
undeveloped areas.
            8.   Fire hydrants shall not be located in creeks or creek banks.
         (l)   Standard water line sizes are, eight-inch, ten-inch, 12-inch,
16-inch, 20-inch, and 24-inch diameter. Other sizes may be approved by the
Director of Public Works.
         (m)   Water line materials. All water lines and fittings shall be new
materials and shall comply with the following:
            1.   All water lines shall be polyvinyl chloride (PVC) material and
be designed, manufactured, and tested in accordance with the applicable
requirements. All PVC water pipe shall be blue in color. All other materials
must be approved by the Director of Public Works.
            2.   Eight-inch through 12-inch water pipe shall be pressure class
150, DR 18. Pressure class 200, DR 14 pipe may be required by the Director of
Public Works in areas of high distribution system pressure, under roadways or
in unusual circumstances.
            3.   All waterline pipe and fittings shall be new materials and
produced in the USA.
         (n)   Water lines shall be constructed with a minimum of four feet of
cover.
         (o)   Waterline sizing must be in accordance with the Water Masterplan
and may result in oversizing for future capacity.
         (p)   Valves shall be installed at all intersections of water mains to
provide for proper maintenance and operation of the system and to provide a
means of shutting off the supply to portions of the system for repairs.
         (q)   Valves shall be spaced such that only one fire hydrant is out of
service at any one time. Three valves shall be used on a four-way water line
intersection and a minimum of two valves shall be used on a three-way
intersection. Additional valves may be required for isolation purposes.
         (r)   Valves shall not be placed in sidewalks, accessible ramps,
gutter pans or street valley gutters.
         (s)   Valves shall be marked on the curb, or edge of the asphalt
pavement, with the letter "V" scored into the concrete (or asphalt). The base
of the letter "V" shall be placed pointing toward the valve.
         (t)   Valve markers shall be required to locate valves when valves are
installed in undeveloped areas.
         (u)   Tracer wire continuity test stations shall be flush mounted.
         (v)   Water service line sizes will be determined by the developer
prior to requesting service from the city. The minimum water service line size
between the water main and the meter shall be one inch. Water services on
undeveloped lots shall be located at the property line and shall be a minimum
of one inch in diameter.
         (w)   Water services lines shall be marked on the curb, or edge of the
asphalt pavement, with the letter "W" scored into the concrete (or asphalt).
         (x)   Water services lines shall not be connected to fire hydrant
leads.
      (5)   Water wells provisions. The city prohibits the drilling of new
wells within the city limits (§
51.004) unless a waiver is granted by City Council. All existing water wells
shall be considered private and shall be owned and maintained by the property
owner.
   (C)   Sanitary sewer system.
      (1)   The developer of a subdivision shall be required to install, at no
cost to the city, a sewage collection system which shall serve each lot. The
sewage collection system shall be connected to the municipal sewage system and
be designed, sized and constructed in accordance with city design standards.
      (2)   The design and construction of a sewage system shall, at a minimum,
comply with the following standards:
         (a)   Applicable regulations of the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality (TCEQ).
         (b)   City's Wastewater Master Plan.
         (c)   City design and engineering standards.
         (d)   Be sized appropriately to accommodate future sanitary sewer
flows for the fully developed sewerage basin.
      (3)   Lift stations.
         (a)   Lift stations should be avoided whenever possible. Utilization
of a lift station requires the written approval of the Director of Public
Works.
         (b)   If written approval is granted by the Director of Public Works,
lift stations shall be designed per the applicable regulations of the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality.
      (4)   General design and construction requirements.
         (a)   No wastewater system shall be constructed unless all plans have
been reviewed and released for construction by the city to assure compliance
with these requirements.
         (b)   All newly created lots are required to have their own wastewater
service tap.
         (c)   Main trunk lines shall be sized based on the sewerage basin,
considering current and future service needs. The depth of trunk lines shall be
adequate to accommodate future tie-ins from all areas of the sewer basin.
         (d)   A utility study shall be required by the city to verify capacity
of existing facilities. Where a utility study indicates that additional
sanitary sewer flow from the developing property will overload downstream
facilities and result in hazardous conditions, the city may withhold approval
of the development until appropriate provisions have been made. These
provisions may include any utility design, construction plans, and installation
of the necessary system improvements to accommodate the increase in sanitary
sewage to the downstream system. The utility study shall:
            1.   All conform to the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
requirements for the design of a wastewater collection system.
            2.   Contain at a minimum, all requirements listed in the Tex.
Admin. Code Chapter 217.10.
            3.   Include the signed and dated seal of the engineer, licensed in
the State of Texas, responsible for the utility study.
            4.   Include all pertinent calculations, analyses, graphs,
formulas, constants, tables, geologic information, hydraulic information,
historical data, manufacturers recommendation's, technical assumptions, and any
other information needed to demonstrate that the design of the project complies
with local, state and federal regulations.
         (e)   Standard sewer line sizes are eight-inches, 12-inches, 15-
inches, and 18-inches in diameter. The Director of Public Works may approve
other sizes.
         (f)   Sewer lines shall be constructed with a minimum of four feet of
cover.
         (g)   New sewer lines crossing existing streets shall be placed by
boring. A casing shall be required under roadways classified as collector or
above (including minor collectors). Open cut excavation will not be allowed to
cross-existing streets, unless approved by the Director of Public Works.
         (h)   Along state highways, sewer lines are required to be constructed
on both sides of the roadway.
         (i)   Sewers should be designed with straight alignment whenever
possible. Changes in direction must occur at a manhole. No joint deflection is
allowed without written approval from the Director of Public Works.
         (j)   A minimum wastewater flow of 0.86 gallons per minute shall be
applied to all single-family equivalent connections.
         (k)   Peak flow. When site specific data is unavailable, the peak flow
shall be determined by multiplying the design flow by a factor of at least
four.
         (l)   Utilization of existing and proposed wastewater mains shall be
restricted to 75% of the total peak wet weather flow conveyance capacity.
         (m)   A condition assessment of the existing wastewater main may be
required in order to determine the suitability of a connection to the city's
collection system. The condition assessment shall consist of televising the
section of wastewater main between the upstream and downstream manholes.
         (n)   Sewer line materials. All sewer lines and fittings shall be new
materials and shall comply with the following:
            1.   All sanitary sewer pipes shall be polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
pipe type SDR-35 or better for sewer lines constructed less than ten feet deep.
SDR-26 shall be provided where sewer lines exceed ten feet. PVC pipe will not
be allowed for depths greater than 24 feet unless approved by Director of
Public Works.
            2.   All PVC sanitary sewer pipe shall be green in color. The
developer is required to provide a manufacturer’s statement for pipe colors
other than green.
            3.   PVC sewer pipe and fittings shall conform to the current ASTM
Designation D 3034 for four inches through 15 inches and ASTM Designation F 679
for greater than 15 inches.
         (o)   All sewers shall be designed with hydraulic slopes sufficient to
give mean velocities, when flowing full or half full, of no less than two feet
per second.
         (p)   Sewer lines shall not be installed within nine feet horizontally
of any water main or fire hydrant. Where this is not possible, separation shall
be in accordance with TCEQ standards.
         (q)   Sanitary sewer service lines may not be connected to sanitary
sewer mains whose depth is in excess of 12 feet without written approval from
the Director of Public Works.
         (r)   Manholes.
            1.   Manholes shall be located at all changes in grade, all changes
in direction and at the ends of all sewer lines.
            2.   Manholes shall be located at all intersections of sewer lines
and at intermediate spacing along the line. Generally, the maximum spacing
should not exceed 500 feet.
            3.   A manhole is required at the junction of sewer lines with
different inside pipe diameters.
            4.   A drop of at least one-tenth of a foot is required through the
manhole when a change in flow direction occurs.
            5.   Minimum manhole inside diameter is four feet. Manholes with a
depth greater than 10 feet shall have an inside diameter of five feet.
            6.   A drop manhole is required when the flow line in is two feet
or more greater than the flow line out. Drop-connection manholes shall have a
minimum inside diameter of six feet, with an interior drop.
            7.   Manholes with an exterior drop connection will not be
approved.
            8.   All manholes shall be concrete.
            9.   Manholes located within the floodplain shall have a bolted
sealed cover and frame.
         (s)   Sewer services.
            1.   Materials.
               A.   All lateral sewer service lines in the public right-of-way
shall be gasketed PVC pipe type SDR-35.
               B.   All PVC sanitary sewer pipe used for lateral services shall
be green in color (ASTM SPEC).
            2.   All sewer service lines that are connected to a section of
sewer service piping located within the right-of-way must have a clean out
installed where the property line abuts the right-of-way.
            3.   Sewer service line locations shall be marked on the curb, or
edge of the asphalt pavement, by scoring the letter "S" on the concrete (or
asphalt).
            4.   Point of connection. The point of connection for all sanitary
sewer service lines shall be made to an approved public sewer main line. No
sanitary sewer service line shall directly connect to a manhole, nor shall any
sanitary sewer service connection be made to a sanitary sewer main within 24-
inches of a new or proposed sanitary sewer manhole.
            5.   No sewer service line (lateral) shall be less than four inches
in nominal diameter.
            6.   Sewer service laterals shall have a minimum of four feet of
cover at the property line.
            7.   Commercial and industrial use properties may require
additional treatment prior to being discharged into the public sanitary sewer
system, as required by the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 08-2021-43, passed 8-24-21; Am. Ord. 07-2024-48, passed 7-9-24)
§ 154.101 (RESERVED).
§ 154.102 SEWER INSTALLATION POLICY.
   (A)   Sewer installation distance requirements.
      (1)   All developers shall extend sanitary service to the city sewer
mains if the development is within the following distances to the nearest
existing sanitary sewer line that has adequate capacity, as determined by the
City Engineer:
 
                        Maximum distance a sewer line must be extended from the
Subdivision size (lots) closest boundary of the subdivision or lot to the
                        nearest existing sanitary sewer main
1-5                     1/8 mile
6-50                    1/2 mile
51+                     no limit
 
      (2)   Parcels subdivided on a piecemeal basis will be considered based on
the aggregate number of lots.
   (B)   On-site sewage systems.
      (1)   If the developer is not required to extend public sewer in
accordance with division (A)(1) above, on-site sewage systems may be
considered. The requirements for on-site sewage systems are as follows:
         (a)   A minimum lot size of one acre;
         (b)   On-site sewage facilities be designed in accordance with county
and state regulations;
         (c)   On-site sewage facilities utilize less than 50% of the area of
the lot;
         (d)   None of the on-site sewage facility is located within any
easement;
         (e)   None of the on-site sewage facility is located within the
floodplain;
         (f)   Property owners with on-site sewage systems are required to have
the system inspected by Building Inspections Department at the property owner’s
expense upon installation, alteration, or as a response to complaint(s) related
to system malfunction. A copy of the report must be provided to the city.
         (g)   Existing, properly functioning on-site sewage systems may
continue to be utilized until public sanitary system is available to the
property. The Director of Public Works shall be the regulatory authority
determining if an on-site sewage system is functioning properly.
         (h)   All abandoned septic tanks shall be properly filled with sand in
accordance with the current standards.
         (i)   Permits for new or replacement on-site sewage systems within the
city limits shall be obtained from the city. On-site sewage facilities within
the city’s ETJ are under the jurisdiction of Johnson County.
         (j)   If a new or replacement on-site sewage system is needed and a
city wastewater utility line is located within either the street right of-way
or an easement adjacent to the property, the property shall be required to
connect to the city’s wastewater system.
      (2)   In addition to the above requirements, any subdivision or portion
thereof lying within 1,300 feet of the service spillway level (elevation 733.5
feet above mean sea level) of Lake Pat Cleburne, shall follow provisions set
out in §
98.058 of this code of ordinances and state and county regulations in order to
place an on-site sewage system.
(Ord. 08-2021-43, passed 8-24-21)
§ 154.103 (RESERVED).
§ 154.104 (RESERVED).
§ 154.105 SINGLE-CUSTOMER CHARGES FOR CITY WATER/SEWER MAIN CONNECTIONS.
   Fees required.
   (A)   A customer connecting on to a public water main with new connections
will pay to the city the cost of the water tap and water meter, per connection.
   (B)   A customer connecting on to a public sewer main with new connections
will pay to the city the cost of the sewer tap, per connection.
   (C)   Water and sewer impact fees will also apply, per §
158.008.
(Ord. 08-2021-43, passed 8-24-21)
§ 154.106 OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Title to sanitary sewers facilities.
      (1)   Title to all sanitary sewer mains constructed, including title to
sanitary sewer “service connections” constructed, shall be vested in the city.
Sanitary sewer lines between the service connection and final point of service
shall be vested in the property owner.
      (2)   The city shall maintain and operate only those sanitary sewers
whose title is vested in the city.
   (B)   Title to water facilities.
      (1)   Title to all water mains and water meters constructed, including
title to “service connections” constructed, shall be vested in the city. Water
lines between the service connection and final point of service shall be vested
in the property owner.
      (2)   The city shall maintain and operate only those water mains whose
title is vested in the city.
(Ord. 08-2021-43, passed 8-24-21)
§ 154.107 (RESERVED).
DRAINAGE STANDARDS
§ 154.120 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter shall be to establish policies
governing storm drainage facilities within the city limits and the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city.
   (B)   The purpose of these policies is to protect the general health, safety
and welfare of the public by reducing potential flooding, controlling excessive
runoff, minimizing erosion and siltation problems, and to alleviate damage to
public and private facilities resulting from uncontrolled stormwater runoff.
('68 Code, App. B, § 7.01) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.121 INSTALLATION OF STORMWATER FACILITIES POLICY.
   The following policy shall govern the installation of all stormwater
facilities within the corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial
jurisdictional area:
   (A)   A developer of a new subdivision shall provide, at his expense, a
preliminary stormwater plan of the area to be developed. This study shall be
submitted at the time of filing the preliminary plat and shall be approved by
the City Engineer prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which
consideration of the preliminary plat is considered. The plan shall include the
requirements in §
154.122(A), for the preliminary stormwater plan. The preliminary stormwater
plan may be waived in writing by the City Engineer if the subdivision plan
clearly indicates that no stormwater problem exists.
   (B)   The developer shall have an engineer prepare the final plans for the
installation and construction of all necessary stormwater facilities. These
plans shall be approved by the City Engineer and shall comply with this
subchapter and the standard water and sanitary sewerage specifications of the
city.
   (C)   Cost distribution.
      (1)   The developer shall pay all engineering and construction costs of
all stormwater facilities, including the cost of manholes, inlets, excavations,
and the easement acquisition and construction for all required off-site
drainage.
      (2)   Where a channel is constructed, the developer shall:
         (a)   Pay 100% of the concrete lining or concrete drain installed.
         (b)   Excavate the channel at his expense to the line and grade as
shown on the approved construction plans.
         (c)   Provide all easements for channels, detention facilities, and
storm drainage structures, as required.
         (d)   Install any pipe, trench excavation, inlets, manholes, guard
rail, and other appurtenances and the like to complete the stormwater
facilities.
         (e)   Pay 100% of the cost of any culvert, bridge or street crossing
up to a roadway width of 42 feet, plus pedestrianways. If a roadway wider than
42 feet is required by the city, the additional cost of excess width may be
paid by the city, upon approval by the City Council.
         (f)   Pay 100% of the cost of detention facilities, when required.
   (D)   Ownership and maintenance. All storm drains installed in connection
with any development project which are in a public easement shall be and shall
remain the property of the city, unless exception is approved by the City
Engineer. All storm drainage facilities shall have a two-year maintenance bond.
   (E)   Drainage discharge from the subdivision. Where the stormwater
discharges from the subdivision, the developer shall comply with the following:
      (1)   At the point of discharge, the velocity of the water shall not
exceed the maximum velocity of Table I set forth in §
154.123(F) for the type of structure located downstream.
      (2)   Storm sewers shall discharge into either a storm sewer with
adequate capacity, or into the main watercourse.
('68 Code, App. B, § 7.02) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.122 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Preliminary plan and study.
      (1)   For any property involved in the platting process, the owner shall
provide, at his expense, a preliminary drainage study of the area proposed for
development.
      (2)   The preliminary drainage study shall be submitted concurrently with
the submittal of a preliminary plat or plat revision.
      (3)   The studies shall be prepared by an engineer experienced in city
drainage work. The studies shall include the date and seal and signature of the
engineer responsible for the plan.
      (4)   The study shall include the following:
         (a)   Existing topography as required in §
154.023(F).
         (b)   Flow arrows for existing contours showing the undeveloped flow
rates for the 25-year storm.
         (c)   Existing and proposed drainage facilities both on-site and on
adjacent affected properties.
         (d)   Proposed contours with flow arrows showing the developed flow
rates for the 25-year storm.
         (e)   The scale shall not be smaller than one inch equals 200)feet
with contour intervals not greater than five feet unless a variation is
specifically approved by the City Engineer or his authorized designee.
         (f)   Sufficient design calculations showing preliminary sizes of
drainage facilities and easements sizes and locations.
   (B)   Final engineering plans.
      (1)   The developer shall, at his sole expense, provide complete final
engineering plans and specifications for the drainage facilities.
      (2)   The plans and specifications shall be prepared by an engineer,
meeting the qualifications outlined in division (A)(3) above.
      (3)   The plans and specifications shall be submitted to the City
Engineer for review and concurrence prior to any construction. If the plans
show any alteration to a regulatory floodway which includes regrading or
concrete lining, the developer's engineer shall also submit a study of the
hydraulics of the water channel. The study shall contain sufficient information
so that the City Engineer can forward the study to FEMA for approval and map
revision.
      (4)   Responsibility for plans and specifications. The owner and his
engineer shall be responsible for the accuracy of the information furnished in
the design of the storm drainage facilities as it pertains to both the
development in question and as the drainage facilities affect properties
adjacent to the development. Concurrence in the design by the city shall not be
construed to relieve the owner or his engineer of any responsibility referred
to herein or impose any liability upon the city or its agents.
   (C)   Floodplain areas. All development shall conform to this section and
the requirements of Chapter 151, Floodplain Management, of this code of
ordinances.
('68 Code, App. B, § 7.03) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.123 DRAINAGE FEATURES AND POLICIES.
   (A)   Types. The four different types of basic drainage features are as
follows:
      (1)   Closed systems
      (2)   Reinforced concrete-lined open channels.
      (3)   Natural channels.
      (4)   Detention facilities.
   (B)   Closed systems.
      (1)   Stormwater runoff shall be carried in storm sewer pipe when either
of the following apply:
         (a)   The runoff can be carried in a pipe of 60 inches in diameter or
smaller; or
         (b)   Where it necessary for the protection of adjacent facilities
that the stormwater be carried in an enclosed facility.
      (2)   Headwalls shall be constructed at the outfall of all storm sewer
systems. Adequate velocity control measures shall be designed to control the
upstream and downstream velocities to prevent erosion. When it is mutually
agreeable to both the city and the owner, a concrete lined channel with
sufficient access easement may be used in lieu of a closed pipe.
   (C)   Reinforced concrete-lined open channels. Reinforced concrete-lined
open channels should be used when the criteria outlined in division (B)(1) is
exceeded.
      (1)   Reinforced concrete lined channels shall conform to the following:
         (a)   Channels draining an area with a “CA” factor of 250 or less
shall be lined with reinforced concrete in a manner which will contain the
design frequency storm, plus one foot of freeboard within the concrete lining.
Where “C” is equal to the runoff coefficient, and “A” is equal to the drainage
area in acres.
         (b)   Channels draining an area with a “CA” factor of more than 250
but less than 500 shall be concrete lined to contain the runoff from a ten-year
return frequency storm with balance of the required design frequency storm
contained within grassed slopes no steeper than three horizontal to one
vertical and with a minimum of one foot freeboard.
         (c)   Channels draining an area with a “CA” factor of more than 500
but less than 2,000 shall be constructed with a reinforced concrete pilot
channel not less than 20 feet in width and having at least an 18-inch vertical
side depth, a six-inch depressed invert, and an appropriate edge protection as
accepted by the City Engineer or his authorized designee. The remainder of the
channel shall consist of earthen side slopes with proper vegetative cover on
slopes not steeper than three to one, nor flatter than 1.5%.
         (d)   In lieu of the improvements of a channel draining an area with a
“CA” factor in excess of 500, the City Council may elect to accept the
dedication of all land within the natural 100-year floodplain of the existing
drainage channel as a permanent drainage right-of-way.
         (e)   That the criteria for drainage improvements as hereinabove set
forth in divisions (a) through (d) above shall be applicable to publicly owned
lands solely at the discretion of the city.
      (2)   The maximum permissible velocities in channels shall conform to the
velocities as shown in Table I set forth in division (E) below, unless
otherwise approved in writing by the City Engineer or his authorized designee.
      (3)   The minimum roughness coefficients for various channels and
floodplains shall conform to the values as shown in Table I set forth in
division (E) below, unless approved in writing by the City Engineer or his
authorized designee.
   (D)   Natural channels. Natural channels may be preserved when the criteria
in division (C)(1)(d) above are met or when the developer desires to preserve
natural channels within his addition for purposes of aesthetics and/or open
space. The following criteria shall apply when natural channels are to be
preserved:
      (1)   An application for preservation of a natural channel shall be
submitted to and approved by the Director of Public Works prior to approval of
the preliminary plat. This application shall contain the following information
furnished by the developer:
         (a)   Topographic, hydrologic and hydraulic information sufficient to
properly evaluate the proposal and showing that:
            1.   Before any site work has begun, all land having elevation
below the 50-year return frequency flood elevation is contained within an
easement dedicated to the public for the purpose of providing drainage;
            2.   The channel easement has a minimum hydraulic capacity to
accommodate a 50-year return frequency storm based on a fully developed
watershed;
            3.   That all minor channel improvements, such as reshaping,
realignment, and the like, are protected with sodding, backsloping, cribbing,
or other bank protection that is designed and constructed to control an
analysis shall also be made to determine the effects of the 100-year flood as
required by §
154.124(G)(3). Any change to a regulatory floodway shall comply with §
154.122(B)(3).
      (2)   When the natural channel to be preserved is one which has had a
floodplain information report prepared on it by FEMA, the 100-year return
frequency storm shall be as shown in that particular report unless otherwise
directed by the City Engineer or his authorized designee.
   (E)   Detention facilities. Detention facilities will be required when the
downstream drainage system is not adequate to carry the increased flow from the
development. The facilities shall be designed to restrict the rate of the 100-
year storm flow to the predevelopment conditions. If there is additional
capacity in the downstream drainage system, the additional capacity will be
prorated based on the area of the contributing drainage areas. The detention
system must be approved by the Director of Public Works for design and method
of operation and maintenance.
   (F)   Table I: minimum roughness coefficients and maximum permissible
velocities for channels.
Table I
Minimum Roughness Coefficients and Maximum Permissible Velocities for
Channels
                                                 Maximum Permissible Mean
Channel Description Coefficient of Roughness "n" Velocity
                                                 fps
Table I
Minimum Roughness Coefficients and Maximum Permissible Velocities for Channels
                                                                                 Coefficient Maximum
                                                                                 of          Permissible
Channel Description                                                              Roughness   Mean
                                                                                 "n"         Velocity
                                                                                             fps
I. Minor natural streams.
A. Fairly regular section.
   (1)   Some grass and weeds; little or no brush                          0.030       6
   (2)   Dense growth of weeds, depth of flow materially greater than weed 0.035       8
height
   (3)   Some weeds, light brush on banks                                  0.035       7
   (4)   Some weeds, heavy brush on bank                                   0.050       8
   (5)   Some weeds, dense willows on banks                                0.060       8
   (6)   For trees within channels with branches submerged at high stage,  0.010
increase all values above by
B. Irregular section with pools, slight channel meander, use A.(1) to (5) above  0.010
and increase all values by
C. Floodplain ­ pasture.
   (1)   Short grass                                                       0.030       8
   (2)   Tall grass                                                        0.035       8
D. Floodplain ­ cultivated areas.
   (1)   No crop                                                           0.030       6
   (2)   Mature row crops                                                  0.035       6
Table I
Minimum Roughness Coefficients and Maximum Permissible Velocities for
Channels
                                                 Maximum Permissible Mean
Channel Description Coefficient of Roughness "n" Velocity
                                                 fps
Table I
Minimum Roughness Coefficients and Maximum Permissible Velocities for Channels
                                        Coefficient of Maximum Permissible Mean
Channel Description                     Roughness "n"  Velocity
                                                       fps
E. Floodplain ­ uncleared.
   (1)   Heavy weeds, scattered br0.050          8
   (2)   Wooded                   0.120          8
II. Major natural streams. Roughness coefficient is usually less than for minor
streams of similar description on account of less effective resistance offered
by irregular banks or vegetation on banks. Values of "n" for channels or larger
streams of mostly regular sections, with no boulders or brush may be in the
range from 0.028 to 0.033. Overbanks will be classed as flood plain with "n"
values as shown in divisions I. C., D. and E. above.
III. Unlined vegetated channels.
   Clays (Bermuda grass)             0.035          8
   Sandy and silty soils             0.035          5
IV. Unlined nonvegetated channels.
   Sandy soils                       0.030          2.5
   Silts                             0.030          1.5
   Sandy silts                       0.030          3.0
   Clays                             0.030          5.0
   Coarse gravels                    0.030          8.0
   Shale                             0.030          10.0
   Rock                              0.020          15
V. Lined channels
   Neat concrete                     0.015          15
   Riprap (i.e., broken concrete and 0.030          15
rubble)
 
('68 Code, App. B, § 7.04) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.124 GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to establish standard criteria,
principles, procedures and practices for design of storm drainage facilities.
      (1)   The design factors, formulas, graphs and procedures presented or
referred to herein are intended for use as engineering guides in the design of
drainage facilities and in the solution of drainage problems involving
stormwater `quantity, method of collection, transportation and disposal.
      (2)   Methods of design other than those indicated or referred to herein
may be considered in complex and difficult cases where experience clearly
indicated they are preferable; however, these deviations shall not be attempted
until approval has been obtained from the City Engineer or his authorized
designee.
      (3)   The methods outlined or referred to herein include accepted
principles of surface drainage engineering and should be a working supplement
to basic design information obtainable from textbooks and publications on
drainage.
   (B)   Determination of design discharge.
      (1)   The two methods acceptable for use in the city are:
         (a)   Modified rational method (Q=CCaIA) to be used on small
watersheds of 1,000 acres or less, where:
      Q   =   Discharge expressed in cubic feet per second
      C   =   Runoff coefficient (Table III (Division (D)(2) below)
      Ca   =   Antecedent precipitation factor (Table II (§ 154.126))
      I   =   Rainfall intensity in inches per hour (Cleburne, Texas Rainfall
Intensity Curves)
      A   =   Area in acres
         (b)   Unit hydrograph techniques shall be used for areas greater than
1,000 acres. The technique and the data to be used for the determination of the
design discharge shall be approved by the City Engineer or his authorized
designee prior to the calculations being completed. A complete set of all
detail calculations must be submitted to the City Engineer or his authorized
designee for approval prior to completion of the plans for the drainage system.
      (2)   Table II: Antecedent Precipitation Factor Ca.
 
Table II
Antecedent Precipitation Factor Ca.
Recurrence Interval (Years) Ca
2 to 10                     1.0
25                          1.1
50                          1.2
100                         1.25
Note: The product of Ca should not exceed 1.0.
 
Note: The product of Ca should not exceed 1.0.
   (C)   Drainage area.
      (1)   Area of the watershed shall be determined using the information
required by §
154.123(A)(4) and final grading plan.
      (2)   Outline of drainage areas must follow natural drainage features in
nonurbanized areas. Consideration shall be given to manmade features in
urbanized areas.
   (D)   Runoff coefficients.
      (1)   Storm drainage shall be designed for ultimate development of the
watershed and, therefore, runoff coefficients used shall consider these fully
developed conditions. Master plans, zoning maps and land use plans shall be
used to determine the ultimate development.
      (2)   Table III below gives values for runoff coefficients which shall be
used for the determination of stormwater runoff.
Table III
Runoff Coefficient "C"
Type Area or Land Use Hydrologic Soil Groups*
                      A B C D
Table III
Runoff Coefficient "C"
Type Area or Land Use          Hydrologic Soil Groups*
                               A    B    C    D
Parks and permanent open space .35  .38  .41  .45
Single-family zoning           .50  .52  .55  .58
Duplex zoning                  .60  .63  .66  .70
Apartment zoning               .65  .70  .77  .80
Commercial                     .90  .91  .90  .93
CBD                            1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
Industrial                     Must be proposed by design engineer and approved
                               by City Engineer
*Soil group classification:
   Group A ­ Deep sand, aggregated silts
   Group B ­ Sandy loam
   Group C ­ Clay loam, shallow sandy loam
   Group D ­ Heavy plastic clays
 
   (E)   Time of concentration.
      (1)   Time of concentration is defined as the longest time that will be
required for a drop of water to flow from the upper limit of the drainage area
to the point of concentration.
      (2)   Time of concentration is a combination of surface flow time and
time of flow in the storm drainage facility. For over land flow times, the
methods are to be approved by the City Engineer or his authorized designee.
      (3)   Inlet times shall be:
         (a)   Five minutes for property zoned for multiple-family, local
business, central business, commercial or industrial.
         (b)   Ten minutes for property zoned for parks, schools, single-family
residential and duplex.
   (F)   Rainfall intensity.
      (1)   Rainfall intensity-duration-frequency curves for the city are set
forth on chart reproduced below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7053.jpg]
 
   (G)   Design storm frequency.
      (1)   It is general practice to design city storm drainage systems to
accommodate the runoff from a storm which, on the average, is equaled or
exceeded once every ten or 50 years.
      (2)   Table IV shows the design storm frequencies to be used in the
design of drainage facilities.
      (3)   In connection with the design of facilities such as low point
inlets, culverts, bridges, channels and creeks shown in Table IV set forth in
division (J) below, the discharge for a 100-year return frequency storm and the
resulting possible damages therefrom shall be evaluated to determine if the
damages are sufficient to warrant the enlargement of the planned facility. In
any areas where stormwater runoff concentrates at low points of grade or where
discharge in excess of the design discharge flows across private property, the
following information shall be shown:
         (a)   The 100-year design discharge.
         (b)   The depth of inundation of this discharge.
         (c)   An evaluation of the possible damages resulting from the above
information.
   (H)   Head losses. The design techniques and methods used in the
determination of all head losses shall be approved by the City Engineer or his
authorized designee.
   (I)   Flow in gutters. The drainage capacities of streets and gutters shall
be determined by Manning's Formula using an value of 0.015 for asphalt or 0.013
for concrete streets. Streets shall be designed to flow not more than one inch
above the curb during a ten-year return frequency storm on residential streets.
Collectors and thoroughfares shall maintain a minimum of eight feet of pavement
width above the ten-year frequency.
   (J)   Positive overflow. In areas where positive overflow is not provided
within the street, a concrete flume with a minimum width of four feet with six-
inch curbs shall be required between lots in a drainage easement, near the low
point in the street.
 
Table IV
Type of Facility                       Minimum Design Frequency
Storm sewers (with inlet on grade)     10 years
Storm sewers draining low point inlets 50 years
Culverts, bridges, channels, creeks    50 years
 
   (K)   Flow in storm sewers and channels. The capacity of storm sewers,
culverts, bridges, and open channels shall be determined by the use of the
Manning Formula, and the design of the facility derived accordingly. The
Manning Formula is:
Q = 1.486 r 2/3 s 1/2 A
n
Where:
   Q   =   Discharge, expressed in cubic feet per second
   n   =   Roughness coefficient, based on condition and type of conduit lining
   s   =   Slope of hydraulic gradient, expressed in feet of vertical rise per
foot of horizontal distance
   r   =   Hydraulic radius (area of flow divided by wetted perimeter)
   A   =   Area of flow in conduit, expressed in square feet
('68 Code, App. B, § 7.05) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.125 CONSTRUCTION.
   All construction shall be in accordance with the city standard water and
sewerage specifications.
('68 Code, App. B, § 7.06)
§ 154.126 OFF-SITE DRAINAGE.
   (A)   The owner or developer of property to be developed shall be
responsible for all storm drainage flowing on his property. This responsibility
includes the drainage directed to that property by prior development as well as
drainage naturally flowing through the property by reason of topography.
   (B)   Adequate consideration shall be given by the owner in the development
of property to determine how the discharge leaving the proposed development
will affect downstream property.
   (C)   When any proposed development requires the need for off-site grading
or includes areas of two acres or more where stormwater runoff has been
collected or concentrated, whether it be by permanent drainage systems or
streets, it shall not be permitted to drain onto adjacent property except in
existing creeks, channels, storm sewers or streets unless the following is
provided:
      (1)   Notarized letter of permission from the affected property owner; or
      (2)   Proper drainage easements are obtained; or
      (3)   If the owner is unable to acquire the necessary off-site easements,
he shall provide the city with documentation of his efforts, including evidence
of a reasonable offer made to the adjacent property owner. Upon such a written
request for assistance, the city shall attempt to acquire these easements
through negotiations. If the negotiations are unsuccessful, the request may, at
the developer's option, be submitted to Council for consideration of
acquisition through condemnation. In either case, the total cost of the
acquisition and the cost of the easements shall be paid by the owner
(developer); or
      (4)   If the developer is unable to obtain either number one or number
two above and chooses not to pursue city assistance as outlined in number three
above, he shall provide the city with documentation of his efforts. The
developer will then execute a notarized letter. Said letter shall be in a form
approved by the city attorney and shall provide that the developer shall agree
to save and hold harmless the city from any and all claims or suits for damage
arising out of the required grading and/or concentrations of flow. The city
reserves the right to require the notarized letter of permission or easement
from the affected property owner prior to construction.
   (D)   (1)   The subdivider shall pay for the cost of all drainage
improvements required for the development of his subdivision, including any
necessary off-site channels or storm sewers and acquisition of the required
easements, in which only divisions (C)(2) and (3) above shall apply.
      (2)   In areas where the proposed off-site improvements are to be made
within existing city right-of-way, an estimate of these off-site costs shall be
prepared and submitted along with the plans. Subject to Council approval, cost
for such off-site improvements shall be prorated to the extent that the owner
pays for percentage of the off-site cost based on the increase of the discharge
originating within the limits of his addition.
   (E)   Where it is anticipated that additional runoff incident to the
development of the subdivision or development will overload an existing
downstream drainage facility, whether natural or manmade, and result in
hazardous conditions, the Planning Commission and/or Council may withhold
approval of the subdivision or development until appropriate provision has been
made to accommodate the problem, and plans shall be provided which include all
necessary modifications to on-site improvements and/or off-site improvements
including storm sewer systems, channel grading, driveway adjustments, culvert
improvements, detention facilities, and the like.
('68 Code, App. B, § 7.07) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this ordinance or who shall fail to comply with any provision
hereof within the corporate limits of the city shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$1,000, and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable accordingly.
('68 Code, App. B, § 8.04)
   (B)   A developer shall give at least 24-hours' notice to the City Engineer
of intent to commence actual construction of the community facilities as set
forth in §
154.061 so that inspection personnel can be made available. The developer may
be fined up to $200 per day each violation for failure to comply with this
provision.
('68 Code, App. B, § 4.02(1) (part)) (Ord. 8-1989-34, passed 8-8-89)
CHAPTER 155: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
155.01   Adoption by reference
Supplementary Zoning Provisions
   
155.15   Location of sexually oriented businesses
Historic Landmarks
   
155.80   Purpose
   
155.81   Definitions
   
155.82   Designation of historic landmarks
   
155.83   Certificate of Appropriateness for alterations or new construction
   
155.84   Certificate of Appropriateness required for demolition
   
155.85   Reserved
   
155.86   Enforcement
   
155.87   Fee
   
155.88   Reserved
   
155.89   Reserved
   
155.90   Design guidelines for residential and non-residential historic
landmarks
   
155.91   Recommended design guidelines for the Downtown District
 
   
155.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Zoning Ordinance
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The zoning ordinance for the City of Cleburne is hereby adopted by reference
and is set forth in full as
Appendix A to this chapter.
(Ord. 04-2022-34, passed 4-12-22)
SUPPLEMENTARY ZONING PROVISIONS
§ 155.15 LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a
sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of any of the following:
      (1)   A school;
      (2)   A boundary of a residential or historic district as defined in this
chapter;
      (3)   A public park;
      (4)   The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined
in this chapter;
      (5)   A hospital;
      (6)   A licensed day-care;
      (7)   Buildings and property owned or leased by the city, county, state
or federal government; or
      (8)   A cemetery.
      (9)   A state highway.
   (B)   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she causes or permits the
operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or
control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually
oriented business.
   (C)   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she causes or permits the
operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented
business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or if he or she
causes or permits the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business
in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually
oriented business.
   (D)   For the purposes of divisions (A) and (B) of this section, measurement
shall be made in accordance with the city's zoning ordinance.
   (E)   For purposes of division (B) of this section, the distance between any
two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of
the structure in which each business is located.
   (F)   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the passage of
this ordinance that is in violation of divisions (A), (B), or (C) of this
section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be
permitted to continue for a period not to exceed 18 months, unless sooner
terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days
or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or
altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more
sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise
in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first
established and continually operating at a particular location is the
conforming use and the later-established business(es) is nonconforming.
   (G)   A sexually oriented business fully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or
renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, school,
licensed day-care center, government building, cemetery or hospital within
1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to
the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a
license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked.
(Ord. 8-1997-56, passed 8-12-97; Am. Ord. 4-2001-28, passed 4-10-01) Penalty,
see §
155.99
HISTORIC LANDMARKS
§ 155.80 PURPOSE.
   It is recognized that the city represents the unique confluence of time,
land, and place that shaped the identity of generations of citizens,
collectively and individually, and produced significant historic,
architectural, and cultural resources that constitute their heritage. This
subchapter has been established to provide for the protection, enhancement, and
perpetuation of landmarks of historical and cultural importance and
significance. It also proposes to promote the economic, cultural, educational
and general welfare of the public.
(Ord. 08-2007-44, passed 8-28-07; Am. Ord. 10-2007-57, passed 10-9- 07)
§ 155.81 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, when used in this subchapter, shall take precedence and
shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless
the context of this subchapter clearly indicates otherwise. Words that are not
defined in this subchapter shall have the meaning as defined by the city.
   ALTERATION. Any change to the exterior of a building, structure, object or
site. ALTERATION shall include, but is not limited to, changing to a different
kind, type or size of roofing or siding materials; changing, elimination, or
adding exterior doors, door frames, windows, window frames, shutters, fences,
railings, columns, beams, walls, porches, steps, porte-cocheres, balconies, or
ornamentation, or the dismantling, moving or removing any exterior feature.
ALTERATION does not include ordinary maintenance or repair.
   ARCHITECTURAL CONTROL. Regulations governing the appearance or architectural
style of buildings or structures.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. A current and valid permit issued by the
Historic Preservation Officer or the Commission, as applicable, which approves
the issuance of a building permit for construction, alteration, rehabilitation,
restoration, relocation or demolition required by this subchapter.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Cleburne.
   COMMISSION. The Historic Preservation Commission which shall consist of the
five members of the City Council of the City of Cleburne, as defined in §
31.63 Commission Established.
   DESIGNATED. The formal recognition by the Commission of a building,
structure, object, or site as historically, architecturally, culturally or
archaeologically significant to the city, state, nation or region.
   EXTERIOR FEATURE. An element of the architectural character and general
arrangement of the external portion of a building, structure or object,
including building material that is visible from a public right-of-way.
   HISTORIC LANDMARK. Any site, individual building, structure, or object
designated by ordinance of the City Council that is worthy of rehabilitation,
restoration and or preservation for its historic, cultural and or architectural
significance to the city.
   HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER. The Historic Preservation Officer of the
city, as designated by the City Manager.
   NONRESIDENTIAL. Property that shall not be used for residential purposes
under the Zoning Ordinance of the city.
   ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR. This generally refers to activities
relating to a property that would be considered ordinary or common for
maintaining the property, such as replacement of a porch floor with identical
or in-kind materials. It also shall include other activities such as painting.
   PRESERVATION. The act or process of applying measures to sustain the
existing form, integrity, and material of a building or structure, and the
existing form and vegetative cover of a site. It shall include initial
stabilization work, where necessary, as well as ongoing maintenance of the
historic building materials.
   RESIDENTIAL. Property that may be used for residential purposes under the
Zoning Ordinance of the city.
(Ord. 08-2007-44, passed 8-28-07; Am. Ord. 10-2007-57, passed 10-9- 07; Am.
Ord. 01-2020-08, passed 1-28-20)
§ 155.82 DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC LANDMARKS.
   A historic landmark shall be designated as follows:
   (A)   Automatic eligibility. Designated recorded Texas historic landmarks
and or properties listed in the National Register of Historic Places shall be
automatically eligible for designation as a historic landmark upon processing
of a nomination application by the owner of the property or structure.
   (B)   Nomination of historic landmark.
      (1)   Nomination for historic landmark designation shall be voluntary and
made to the Commission. The nomination shall be submitted to the Historic
Preservation Officer by the owner of record of the nominated property.
      (2)   Any proposal to designate a historic landmark shall be reviewed by
the Historic Preservation Officer and forwarded to the Commission for
designation of buildings, structures or objects as historic landmarks.
   (C)   Criteria. The following criteria shall be considered when determining
whether a nominated property is eligible for consideration.
      (1)   Significance in history, architecture, archeology and or culture;
      (2)   Association with events that have made a significant contribution
to the patterns of local, regional, state or national history;
      (3)   Association with the lives of persons significant in our past;
      (4)   Embodiment of the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or
method of construction;
      (5)   Representative work of a master designer, builder or craftsman; or
      (6)   An established and familiar visual feature of the city.
   (D)   Historic Preservation Commission public hearing.
      (1)   A residential property shall be designated as a historic landmark
only upon the request of the property owner.
      (2)   The Commission may nominate a nonresidential building, site, or
structure for the purpose of designating it as a historic landmark, with the
property owner's consent.
      (3)   The Commission shall conduct a public hearing to determine whether
the nomination does or does not meet the criteria for designation. Not later
than the fifteenth day before the public hearing, the city shall provide a
statement to the owner of the property of the impact the designation may have
on the owner and the property. The statement must include regulations that may
be applied to any structure on the property after the designation; procedures
for the designation; tax benefits that may be applied to the property after the
designation; and rehabilitation or repair programs that the municipality offers
for a property designated as historic.
      (4)   The Commission shall give mailed notice to owners of the proposed
historic landmark and those within 200 feet of the proposed historic landmark,
such notice to be given, not less than ten days before the date set for hearing
to all such owners as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll.
      (5)   At the Commission's public hearing, owners, interested parties, and
technical experts shall present testimony or documentary evidence which will
become part of a record regarding the historic, architectural, or cultural
importance of the proposed historic landmark.
      (6)   The Commission shall determine the significance, or lack of
significance, of the nominated property and its relationship to the criteria as
set forth in division (C) of this section.
      (7)   The designation as a historic landmark does not obligate the
property owner to improve, alter, or change a property. However, owners of
designated property shall comply with the provisions of this subchapter and all
other city ordinances.
      (8)   The Commission shall designate the historic landmark by ordinance
or reject the nomination of the historic landmark.
   (E)   Recording. Upon designation of a historic landmark, the Commission
shall cause the designation to be recorded in the official real property
records of Johnson County and with the Johnson County Appraisal District.
   (F)   Historic markers. The Commission shall be responsible for determining
the material, size, shape, color and design of historical markers for
designated historic landmarks.
   (G)   Removal of historic designation. The Commission may remove the
historic designation from a property.
(Ord. 08-2007-44, passed 8-28-07; Am. Ord. 10-2007-57, passed 10-9-07; Am. Ord.
01-2020-08, passed 1-28-20)
§ 155.83 CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS FOR ALTERATIONS OR NEW CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   No person shall carry out any exterior alteration, restoration,
demolition, reconstruction, new construction or relocation of a landmark, or
make changes in the exterior appearance of such landmark, visible from a public
right-of-way (excluding ordinary maintenance and repairs as described in §
155.81) which affects the appearance and cohesiveness of the historic landmark,
without first applying for a Certificate of Appropriateness from the
Commission, or as permitted by the Historic Preservation Officer, as described
in this section. The Commission shall have the authority to review all
applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness and shall issue or decline to
issue the certificate after conducting a public hearing and providing notice as
stipulated herein. The applicant may appeal Officer denials to the Commission.
   (B)   No building permit shall be issued for proposed work until a
Certificate of Appropriateness has first been issued by the Historic
Preservation Officer or the Commission applicable. The Certificate of
Appropriateness required by this subchapter shall be in addition to and not in
lieu of any building permit that may be required by any other ordinance of the
city.
   (C)   In considering an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness,
approval or denial shall be guided by any adopted design guidelines or
construction standards and, where applicable, the following criteria from the
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Rehabilitation of Historic
Buildings. Adopted design guidelines and Secretary of the Interior's Standards
shall be made available to the owners of historic landmarks.
      (1)   Every reasonable effort shall be made to adapt the property in a
manner which requires minimal alteration of the building, structure, object, or
site and its environment.
      (2)   The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building,
structure, object, or site and its environment shall be preserved, when
feasible. The removal or alteration of historic material or distinctive
architectural features should be avoided when possible.
      (3)   All buildings, structures, objects, and sites shall be recognized
as products of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and
which seek to create an appearance of an earlier architectural design period
shall be discouraged. Such alterations shall be permitted only with approval by
the Commission after consideration of a detailed and written explanation
regarding the need for such alteration.
      (4)   Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of a building, structure, object, or
site and its environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their
own right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected.
      (5)   Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsman
which characterize a building, structure, object, or site shall be kept where
possible.
      (6)   Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than
replaced, wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new
material should reflect the material being replaced in composition, design,
color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing
architectural features should be based on accurate duplication of features,
substantiated by historical, physical, or pictorial evidence rather than on
conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements
from other buildings or structures.
      (7)   The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the
gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will
damage the historic building materials shall not be undertaken.
      (8)   Subject property owner is not responsible for other's property.
      (9)   Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing
properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not
destroy significant historical, architectural, or cultural material, and such
design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of
the property, neighborhood, or environment. Such alterations and additions
shall be reviewed by the Commission at a public hearing.
      (10)   The Commission shall give mailed notice to owners of the proposed
historic landmark and those within 200 feet of the proposed historic landmark,
such notice to be given, not less than ten days before the date set for
hearing.
      (11)   Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to buildings,
structures, objects, or sites shall be done in such a manner that if such
additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form
and integrity of the building, structure, object, or site would be unimpaired.
   (D)   Administrative approval. The Historic Preservation Officer shall
approve a Certificate of Appropriateness if the requested construction is not
considered to be substantive and does not address the physical alterations or
visual appearance of the designated historical landmark.
   (E)   The Historic Preservation Officer may request that the Commission
consider any request as deemed appropriate.
   (F)   Administrative staff shall not deny a Certificate of Appropriateness,
but shall forward any such application to the Commission for consideration.
   (G)   If the requested construction is considered to be substantive and does
not meet the recommended design guidelines, or if there are written objections
to the application, the Historic Preservation Officer shall forward the request
to the Commission for action.
   (H)   Historic Preservation Commission action. The Commission shall conduct
a public meeting regarding a request for a Certificate of Appropriateness. The
Commission shall approve the permit, deny the permit, or approve with
modification.
      (1)   The Commission shall give published and mailed notice to owners of
the requested Certificate of Appropriateness and those within 200 feet of the
proposed historic landmark, such notice to be given, not less than ten days
before the date set for hearing.
      (2)   If approved, decisions of the Commission shall state all findings
pertaining to the approval or modification of the application. A copy shall be
sent to the applicant. Additional copies shall be filed as part of the public
record on that property and dispersed to appropriate city departments, such as
building inspections.
      (3)   Denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall only be granted by
the Commission.
   (I)   Commission hearing. If a Certificate of Appropriateness is recommended
for denial by the Historic Preservation Officer, the Commission shall schedule
a public hearing to take action to approve, approve with modification, or deny
the application.
   (J)   Application. The application for a Certificate of Appropriateness
shall contain:
      (1)   Name, address, telephone number of applicant, detailed description
of proposed work;
      (2)   Location and current photograph of the property and adjacent
properties;
      (3)   Historic photographs of the property, if available;
      (4)   Elevation drawings of proposed changes, if available;
      (5)   Samples of materials to be used;
      (6)   If the proposal includes signs or lettering, a scaled drawing
showing the type of lettering to be used, all dimensions and colors, a
description of materials to be used, method of illumination (if any), and a
plan showing the sign's location on the property; and
      (7)   Other information which the city administrative staff, or
Commission may deem necessary to review the proposed work.
(Ord. 08-2007-44, passed 8-28-07; Am. Ord. 10-2007-57, passed 10-9- 07; Am.
Ord. 01-2020-08, passed 1-28-20)
§ 155.84 CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS REQUIRED FOR DEMOLITION.
   A permit for the demolition of a designated landmark shall not be granted by
the Building Official or other city official without the issuance of a
Certificate of Appropriateness as provided for in Certificate of
Appropriateness for alterations or new construction contained herein.
   (A)   Architectural design guidelines. In considering an application for a
Certificate of Appropriateness, the Commission shall be guided by any design
guidelines and or construction standards approved by the City Council.
   (B)   Ordinary maintenance. No regulations provided herein shall be
construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior
architectural feature of a designated historic landmark which does not involve
a change in design material or outward appearance, including but not limited
to, change in exterior paint color. In-kind replacement or repair is included
in this definition of ordinary maintenance.
   (C)   Demolition by neglect. No owner, responsible party, or persons with an
interest in a designated historic landmark shall permit the property to fall
into a serious state of disrepair, such that the result of such deterioration
of any exterior architectural feature would produce a detrimental effect upon
the character of the landmark itself. Such deteriorated condition shall
include:
      (1)   Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports;
      (2)   Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members;
      (3)   Deterioration of exterior chimneys;
      (4)   Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar;
      (5)   Ineffective waterproof of exterior walls, roof, or foundation,
including broken windows or doors; or
      (6)   Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition,
which could lead to the claim that demolition is necessary for the public
safety.
(Ord. 08-2007-44, passed 8-28-07; Am. Ord. 10-2007-57, passed 10-9- 07; Am.
Ord. 01-2020-08, passed 1-28-20)
§ 155.85 (RESERVED).
§ 155.86 ENFORCEMENT.
   Enforcement shall be in accordance with Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code § 315.006 and
Tex. Gov’t Code § 442.016, as amended.
(Ord. 08-2007-44, passed 8-28-07; Am. Ord. 10-2007-57, passed 10-9- 07; Am.
Ord. 01-2020-08, passed 1-28-20)
§ 155.87 FEE.
   A filing fee of $150 shall be paid to the city at the time of submission of
any application in accordance with this subchapter, except where a property is
nominated by the Commission for consideration.
(Ord. 08-2007-44, passed 8-28-07; Am. Ord. 10-2007-57, passed 10-9- 07; Am.
Ord. 01-2020-08, passed 1-28-20)
§ 155.88 (RESERVED).
§ 155.89 (RESERVED).
§ 155.90 DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR RESIDENTIAL AND NON-RESIDENTIAL HISTORIC
LANDMARKS.
   (A)   Adoption of design guidelines. Pursuant to §§
155.80 through
155.87 hereof, Historic Landmarks, the City Council adopts the following design
guidelines for residential and non-residential buildings which are designated
as historic landmarks. Such design guidelines shall be applicable in addition
to the Secretary of Interior's standards for the rehabilitation of historic
buildings. If there is a conflict between these design guidelines and the
Secretary of the Interior's standards for the rehabilitation of historic
buildings, the most restrictive regulations shall apply.
   (B)   Elements of design guidelines. These guidelines focus on the following
elements for work that is to be done on residential or non-residential
structures which are designated historic landmarks:
      (1)   Color;
      (2)    Roof styles;
      (3)    Ornamental features;
      (4)    Porches;
      (5)    Windows;
      (6)    Exterior materials; and
      (7)    Fences.
   (C)   Color. Colors shall be used to maintain the character of the area
where the historic landmark is located and to complement and promote the
heritage of both residential and non-residential construction. The color of the
exterior surfaces of historic landmark structures is one of the factors with
the greatest visual impact. The colors for the trim and primary structure shall
be tones that reflect the time period of the original construction. These
colors are readily available from major paint suppliers and usually are
categorized into a selection grouping for compatibility. The primary colors may
be used in combination with each other to provide contrasting trim colors.
Painting of structures totally in one paint color scheme is strongly
discouraged and will be addressed at the time of consideration of any
application.
   (D)   Roof styles. An important element of the visual presentation of a
structure is the style and construction of the roof. The character of the roof
must be compatible with the general period of construction.
      (1)   Residential roof styles. The roof and pitch of the roof shall be in
keeping with traditional types and styles in use in historic residential areas
of the city. If repaired or replaced, the original pitch and style are
required. Some of these roof types include a gable with such variations as the
“clipped gable” and “saltbox.” These also include the hip with such variations
as “gable on hip.”
         (a)   Any of these traditional roof types is acceptable without the
need to duplicate the predominant roof type of a specific area since part of
the charm of the city streetscape is the variety of roof styles and pitches.
Acceptable materials include slate, asphalt shingle, and simulated shingles.
Wood shingles must be approved by the Fire Marshal.
         (b)   Original roof materials and color shall be retained for
replacement of a roof when at all possible. The color and texture of shingles
shall be appropriate to the architectural style and period of the structure.
      (2)   Non-residential roof styles. Non-residential historic landmark
structures located in the downtown area should typically have a flat roof with
parapet walls along the front and sides. Pitch roofs for non-residential
historic landmark structures are permitted in transitional areas where
residential structures are located. Pitch roofs are preferred for historic
landmark church structures but are not required. Metal roofs on historic
landmark structures located in transition areas may be of metal construction
only if such construction is standing seam of a green, bronze, or other color
pertaining to the time period. Changes to the roof type or material of any
historic landmark structure, residential or non-residential, requires review
recommendation and approval of the Commission and other bodies, as may be
required by this subchapter.
   (E)   Architectural detail. Architectural details help establish the
character of historic structures. These details are unique to the period of
time which the Commission is seeking to preserve.
      (1)   Architectural details are those items that add to the basic
features of the construction of an historic landmark to give the structure its
own unique character and signature. These features may be items such as window
and door trim styles, corner pilasters, gable peak ornamentation, lattice work,
balustrades, traditional paneled and louvered wooden shutters and similar
details.
      (2)   The applicant is encouraged to extend the design style of the
existing historic landmark structure to any addition, and, in the case of
alteration of an existing historic landmark structure, the architectural
details of the exterior shall be preserved. Changes that have taken place in
the course of time which are evidence of the history and development of the
building and the environment may have acquired significance in their own right;
and their significance shall be recognized and respected. Architectural details
of any period or style not original to the building shall not be introduced.
Commercial historic landmark structures shall demonstrate detail on parapet
walls, windows, doors, trim and brick work.
   (F)   Porches. Porches are one of the most important characteristics of
residential structures. Nonresidential structures also have specific treatments
to the front of the structure which are of similar importance.
      (1)   Porches on historic landmark structures in residential areas are
encouraged and shall be retained. Porches are an integral part of the original
design of a historic residence. They are often the most important design
element on the front of a residence. It is important to preserve the historic
integrity of a residence by retaining original elements such as posts,
balustrades and steps. New construction shall incorporate these elements into
the design of the new structure.
      (2)   It is recommended that new rooms added to historic landmark
structures be constructed to the rear of the house where they are not visible
from the street. If it is unavoidable to enclose a porch, all supporting posts,
railings, and other decorative features shall be retained. A design that is
easily reversible shall be considered. Porches shall not be enclosed with glass
or walls or any other material. The only acceptable material is screening.
   (G)   Windows. The style and type of windows helps to establish the
historical character of residential and non-residential structures. The primary
emphasis shall be on windows that are visible from public spaces.
      (1)   Residential.  
         (a)   Windows are a defining character of the heritage of a designated
historic landmark structure. Alterations or additions to historic landmarks
shall have windows that are compatible with the existing and surrounding
structures. Most original structures which are historic landmarks feature
double hung wood windows and some newer structures feature an assortment of
casement windows.
         (b)   As a general policy the following standards shall be observed
when work is done on a residential historic landmark structure:
            1.   The original shape of the window shall be maintained.
            2.   The original number and arrangement of panes should be
maintained.
            3.    The characteristic window shape shall reflect the period of
construction.
            4.    Aluminum storm windows and screens are appropriate. Blind
stop storm windows painted to match sash color are preferred.
            5.    Shutters, unless appropriate to the style of the building,
shall not be introduced. Shutters shall fill an opening in height and width so
that if they were closed, the opening would be covered.
            6.    Window openings shall not be introduced unless they match the
existing window configuration, and their placement harmonizes with the existing
pattern of the openings.
            7.    Original windows shall not be filled in.
      (2)   Non-residential. 
         (a)   Similar to residential structures, windows on non-residential
designated historic landmark structures are an integral part of the character
of the structure. The window types must be consistent with the style. The
windows and the entrance are a principle feature for this style.
         (b)   Similar to policies for residential windows, the following shall
be observed when work is done on a non-residential historic landmark structure:
            1.    The original shape of the window shall be maintained.
            2.    The original number and arrangement of panes should be
maintained.
            3.   The characteristic window shape shall reflect the period of
construction.
            4.    Window openings shall not be introduced unless they match the
existing window configuration and their placement harmonizes with the existing
placement pattern of the openings.
            5.    Original windows shall not be filled in.
   (H)   Exterior materials. Exterior treatment of walls is critical in
residential structures.
      (1)   Many of the structures in historic areas were originally
constructed with wood exteriors. To support the character of designated
historic landmarks, wood is preferred for exterior repairs, additions, and new
construction, when it is consistent with the existing exterior surface.
Materials that mimic the appearance of wood may be utilized so long as the
historic exterior appearance of historic landmarks are maintained in all cases.
      (2)   As a general policy, the following standards shall be observed:
         (a)    Trim and detailing shall not be removed unless being repaired
or replaced with compatible material of the time period.
         (b)    Replacement wood siding shall replicate the materials,
dimensions, lap dimensions, detailing and placement patterns of the original.
         (c)    Artificial siding, including, but not limited to, vinyl,
aluminum, and artificial brick and stone may be used only when it is deemed
absolutely necessary, and in such cases, the visual historic character of the
structure must be maintained.
         (d)    Painting of original brick is inappropriate unless it is
mismatched or so deteriorated that it cannot withstand weather. If painting is
necessary, original brick colors shall be used.
         (e)    Decorative shingles on the entire exterior of a structure may
not be used, unless historic documentation exists that indicates such usage.
         (f)    Covering original brick of non-residential structures with
aluminum or false fronts including mansard-type awnings shall not be permitted.
Any remodeling or reconstruction of structures with this treatment shall
include removal of aluminum siding and false fronts.
   (I)   Fences. Materials used for enclosures of residential property often
reflect the character of the neighborhood.
      (1)   Fences in the front yard of an historic landmark structure are a
decorative element. As a rule, the fence regulations adopted by the city shall
govern fences unless otherwise provided herein.
      (2)   As a general policy, the following standards shall be applicable to
fences in the yards of historic landmark structures:
         (a)   Metal fences located in the front yard shall be decorative iron
material, and no chain link fences are permitted in the front yard.
         (b)   Wood-picket fences are appropriate in front and rear yards of
houses when they are consistent with the architectural style of the main
structure. Board fences, with the boards spaced closely together, are
appropriate only around rear yards.
         (c)   New front yard fences shall be open in character so as to not
create a visual barrier between the main structure and the public street.
         (d)   New decorative fences placed in the front yard shall not exceed
a height of 42 inches.
         (e)   Fences located in the front yard shall have an appropriate
transition to fences located in the rear and side yards. Transitions may be
accomplished by gradually increasing the height to the height of the rear yard
fence, incorporating landscaping to aid in the transition, or extending the
character of the decorative fence into the rear of the side yard.
   (J)   New construction. The following general policies shall be observed for
any new construction of a residential or non-residential structure designated
as a historic landmark:
      (1)   These guidelines apply only to the exterior of buildings and to
areas of lots visible from the public rights-of-way.
      (2)   New structures shall be constructed to the same scale and style as
structures in the surrounding area so that they are compatible with such other
structures.
      (3)   Outbuildings, garages and storage buildings shall reflect the
character of the existing residence and surrounding structures and shall be
compatible with the existing residence in terms of height, scale, roof shape,
materials, texture, and details. The location and design of outbuildings shall
not be visually disruptive to the character of the surrounding buildings.
      (4)   The appearance of new construction, including driveways, sidewalks,
lighting, fences, and walls, shall be visually compatible with the environment
of the existing structures and sites to which they relate.
   (K)   Exterior materials.
      (1)   Any construction of exterior walls for any historic landmark
structure shall be of exterior fire resistant construction having at least 75%
of the total exterior walls above grade level, excluding doors and windows,
constructed of masonry or other equivalent material, in accordance with the
city’s building and fire codes. Strict adherence to this requirement shall not
be such as to prevent architectural integrity of the period.
      (2)   Standards for masonry construction types on historic landmark
structures are listed below:
         (a)    Stone material.  Masonry construction using stone material may
consist of granite, marble, limestone, slate, river rock, and other hard and
durable naturally occurring all weather stone. Cut stone and dimensioned stone
techniques are acceptable.
         (b)    Brick material.  Brick material used for masonry construction
shall be hard fired (kiln fired) clay or slate material which meets the latest
version of ASTM standard C2l6, standard specification for facing brick (solid
masonry unit made of clay or shale), and shall be severe weather (SW) grade,
and Type FBA or FBS or better. Unfired clay, sand, or shale brick are not
allowed.
         (c)   Concrete masonry units.  Concrete masonry units used for masonry
construction shall meet the latest version of the following applicable
specifications: ASTM C90, standard specification for hollow load bearing
concrete masonry units; ASTM Cl45, standard specification for solid load
bearing masonry units; ASTM Cl29, standard specification for hollow and solid
nonload bearing units. Concrete masonry units shall have an indented, hammered,
split face finish or other similar architectural finish. Lightweight concrete
block or cinder block construction is not acceptable as an exterior finish.
         (d)    Concrete panel construction.  Concrete finish, pre-cast panel,
tilt wall, or cement composition reinforced panel construction shall be
painted, fluted, or exposed aggregate. Smooth or non-textured concrete finishes
are not acceptable unless painted.
         (e)   Glass and metal standards.  Glass walls shall include glass
curtain walls or glass block construction. “Glass curtain wall” means an
exterior wall which carries no structural loads, and may consist of a
combination of metal, glass, or other surfacing material supported in a metal
framework.
(Ord. 03-2008-21, passed 3-25-08; Am. Ord. 01-2020-08, passed 1-28-20)
§ 155.91 RECOMMENDED DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR THE DOWNTOWN DISTRICT.
   (A)   Adoption of recommended design guidelines.
      (1)   The City Council adopts the following non-binding, recommended
design guidelines for all renovation or repairs of buildings in the Downtown
District and for construction of new buildings in the Downtown District. The
City Council finds that it is desirable for development in the Downtown
District to comply with these guidelines. When used in this division, “Downtown
District” means the aforementioned Downtown District as designated and
described.
      (2)   Adoption of these guidelines does not exempt a property owner from
compliance with the zoning ordinance, building codes and other city codes and
ordinances which apply to property in the Downtown District.
   (B)   Elements of recommended design guidelines.  These recommended design
guidelines for the Downtown District focus on the following elements when
buildings are renovated or repaired, or new buildings are constructed:
      (1)    Color;
      (2)    Roof styles;
      (3)    Ornamental feature;
      (4)    Porches;
      (5)    Windows;
      (6)    Exterior materials;
      (7)   Lighting; and
      (8)    Signage.
   (C)   It is recommended that all renovation or repairs of buildings and all
construction of new buildings in the Downtown District comply with the
standards stated in this division. Designated historic landmarks in the
Downtown District are required to comply with the historic preservation
division and the design guidelines contained in §
155.90.
   (D)   Color. The color of exterior surfaces of structures in the Downtown
District is one of the factors which has the greatest visual impact. The colors
for the trim and primary structure should be tones that reflect the time period
of the original construction. These colors are readily available from major
paint suppliers and usually are categorized into a selection grouping for
compatibility. Painting of structures totally in one paint color scheme is
strongly discouraged and will be discussed at the time of consideration of any
application.
   (E)   Downtown roof styles. Structures located in the Downtown District
should have a flat roof with parapet walls along the front and sides. Roofs
should be of metal construction only if the construction is architecturally
standing seam design is green, bronze, or other colors.
   (F)   Architectural detail.
      (1)   Architectural details are those items that add to the basic
features of the construction to give the structure its own unique character and
signature. These features may be items such as window and door trim styles,
corner pilasters, gable peak ornamentation, lattice work, balustrades,
traditional paneled and louvered wooden shutters and the like.
      (2)   The property owner is encouraged to extend the design style of the
existing structure to any addition, and, in the alteration of an existing
structure, the architectural details on the exterior should be preserved.
Changes that have taken place in the course of time, which are evidence of the
history and development of the building and the environment, may have acquired
significance in their own right; their significance should be recognized and
respected.
      (3)   Architectural details of any period or style not original to the
building should not be introduced. Commercial structures should demonstrate
detail on parapet walls, windows, doors, trim and brick work.
   (G)   Windows. Windows on buildings in the Downtown District are an integral
part of the character of the structures. The window type should be consistent
with the style of the building. Similar to residential policies for windows in
historic landmarks, the following should be observed:
      (1)    The original shape of the window should be maintained.
      (2)    The original number and arrangement of panes should be maintained.
      (3)    The characteristic window shape shall reflect the period of
construction.
      (4)   New window openings should not be introduced unless they match the
existing window configuration and their placement harmonizes with the existing
placement pattern of the openings.
      (5)    Original windows should not be filled in.
   (H)   Exterior materials. The historic exterior materials should be
maintained in all cases. As a general policy, the following should be observed:
      (1)   Trim and detailing should not be removed.
      (2)   Replacement wood siding should replicate the materials, dimensions,
lap dimensions, detailing and placement patterns of the original.
      (3)   Artificial siding, including, but not limited to, vinyl, aluminum,
and artificial brick and stone, should be used only when it is deemed
absolutely necessary and in such cases that the visual historic character of
the structure should be maintained.
      (4)    Painting of original brick is inappropriate unless it is
mismatched or so deteriorated that it cannot withstand weather. If painting is
necessary, original natural colors should be used.
      (5)    Decorative shingles on the entire exterior of a structure should
not be used, unless historic documentation exists that indicates such usage.
      (6)   The original brick of non-residential structures should not be
covered with aluminum or false fronts including mansard-type awnings. Any
remodeling or reconstruction of structures with this treatment should include
removal of aluminum siding and false fronts.
   (I)   New construction. It is recommended that the following general
policies be observed for any new construction in the Downtown District:
      (1)    These guidelines apply only to the exterior of buildings and to
areas with lots visible from public rights-of-way.
      (2)    The public facades (front and street related elevations) of
proposed new construction in the Downtown District should be more carefully
reviewed by the city than other facades.
      (3)    New structures should be constructed to a scale and style that it
is compatible with other structures in the Downtown District.
      (4)    Appurtenances related to new construction, including driveways,
sidewalks, lighting, fences, and walls, should be visually compatible with the
environment of the existing structures and sites to which they relate.
   (J)   Lighting.  Illumination devices in the Downtown District should not
flash or move and should remain appropriate with the historical era.
   (K)   Signage. Signs within the Downtown District may not rotate or move. As
noted above, signs in the Downtown District must comply with the sign
regulations division.
   (L)   Exterior materials. The exterior walls of buildings in the Downtown
District should feature masonry construction. Recommended standards for masonry
construction types are listed below:
      (1)   Stone material.  Masonry construction using stone material may
consist of granite, marble, limestone, slate, river rock, and other hard and
durable naturally-occurring all weather stone. Cut stone and dimensioned stone
techniques are acceptable.
      (2)    Brick material. Brick material used for masonry construction
should be hard fired (kiln fired) clay or slate material which meets the latest
version of ASTM Standard C2l6, standard specification for facing brick (solid
masonry unit made of clay or shale), and shall be severe weather (SW) grade,
and type FBA or FBS or better. Unfired or clay, sand, or shale brick should not
be used.
      (3)   Concrete masonry units.  Concrete masonry units used for masonry
construction should meet the latest version of the following applicable
specifications: ASTM C90, standard specification for hollow load bearing
concrete masonry units; ASTM Cl45, standard specification for solid load
bearing masonry units; ASTM Cl29, standard specification for hollow and solid
nonload bearing units. Concrete masonry units should have an indented,
hammered, split face finish or other similar architectural finish. Lightweight
concrete block or cinder block construction should not be used as an exterior
finish.
      (4)    Concrete panel construction.  Concrete finish, pre- cast panel,
tilt wall, or cementitious composition reinforced panel construction should be
painted, fluted, or exposed aggregate. Smooth or non-textured concrete finishes
should not be used unless painted.
      (5)   Glass and metal standards.  Glass walls may include glass curtain
walls or glass block construction. “Glass curtain wall” means an exterior wall
which carries no structural loads, and which may consist of the combination of
metal, glass, or other surfacing material supported in a metal framework.
(Ord. 03-2008-22, passed 3-25-08; Am. Ord. 01-2020-08, passed 1-28-20)
§ 155.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter
for which no other specific penalty is provided shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Sexually oriented businesses.
      (1)   Except as provided by division (B)(2) of this section, any person
violating §
155.15 shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment for committing a Class
A misdemeanor, by a fine not to exceed $4,000 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which violation
occurs.
      (2)   If the sexually oriented business involved is an adult cabaret or
other adult establishment not within the definition of Tex. Loc. Gov't Code §
243.002, then violation of §
155.15 is punishable as a Class C misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of
the provisions of §§
155.80 through
155.89 shall be fined not more than $2,000 for each offense.
(Ord. 8-1997-56, passed 8-12-97; Am. Ord. 10-1998-69, passed 10-13- 98; Am.
Ord. 2-2002-08, passed 2-12-02; Am. Ord. 08-2004-47, passed 8-24-04; Am. Ord.
08-2007-44, passed 8-28-07; Am. Ord. 04-2022-34, passed 4-12-22)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 243.010(b)
APPENDIX A: ZONING ORDINANCE
Section
   
155.1   General provisions
   
155.2   Zoning districts
   
155.3   Zoning land use regulations
   
155.4   Site development requirements
   
155.5   Zoning application submittal and processing procedures
   
155.6   Zoning relief procedures
   
155.7   Zoning definitions
§ 155.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   1.01.   Enacting Clause. The City Council by ordinance and by the authority
of Tex. Local Gov’t Code Chapter 211.003, enacts and adopts these regulations
as the official zoning ordinance for the City of Cleburne, Texas.
   1.02.   Purpose.
      A.   Implementation of the comprehensive plan. The zoning regulations and
districts established in this Zoning Ordinance have been made according to the
comprehensive plan to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the
city. The City Council adopts these zoning regulations and districts to achieve
the following purposes:
         1.   Lessen congestion in the streets;
         2.   Secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers;
         3.   Promote health and general welfare;
         4.   Provide adequate light and air;
         5.   Prevent the overcrowding of land;
         6.   Avoid undue concentration of population; and
         7.   Plan for and provide adequate transportation, water, wastewater,
schools, parks, and other public requirements.
      B.   Zoning Ordinance considerations. This Zoning Ordinance creates
regulations and districts with reasonable consideration for the following:
         1.   The character of the districts;
         2.   A district's suitability for the particular uses specified;
         3.   The conservation of the value of buildings; and
         4.   Identification of the most appropriate use of land throughout the
city, consistent with the comprehensive plan.
      C.   Planning and Zoning Commission review.
         1.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall periodically review
potential amendments and updates to the Zoning Ordinance.
         2.   The Planning and Zoning Commission may, by a simple majority
vote, initiate amendments to the Zoning Ordinance or, by a simple majority vote
and following a public hearing, make a recommendation concerning amendments
initiated by City Council or the Zoning Administrator (see subsection 5.05
Zoning Text and Map Amendments).
   1.03.   Zoning District Map Regulation.
      A.   Official Zoning District Map.
         1.   The city will maintain the Official Zoning District Map as a
physical hard copy and an electronic file in a format easily viewed by the
public using conventional computer software.
         2.   The Official Zoning District Map will display on its face the
"Official Adoption Date" and the "Last Amended Date."
      B.   Incorporating updates to the Official Zoning District Map. The
Zoning Administrator is responsible for the following:
         1.   Receiving and processing updates to the Official Zoning District
Map;
         2.   Maintaining the official copy of the Official Zoning District Map
that the city will use for reference;
         3.   Incorporating all subsequent amendments to the Official Zoning
District Map promptly following the City Council's official adoption of each
amendment;
         4.   Recording all amendments to the Official Zoning District Map in a
log with appropriate references to the date and adopting instrument;
         5.   Using all reasonable means to protect the Official Zoning
District Map from damage and ensure the map file's accurate restoration if the
file is damaged or destroyed.
      C.   Replacement of a damaged, destroyed, or lost Official Zoning
District Map.
         1.   If the Official Zoning District Map is partially or entirely
damaged, destroyed, lost, suffers deterioration, or is otherwise unreadable,
the City Council may adopt a new Official Zoning District Map by ordinance
following a public hearing.
         2.   The new Official Zoning District Map that City Council adopts
under this subsection replaces and supersedes any prior Official Zoning
District Map following adoption.
      D.   Error correction. If the Official Zoning District Map includes a
district that is misnamed or designated incorrectly, or depicts an incorrect
zoning district or property boundary, or omits property, the Official Zoning
District Map may be amended or supplemented according to the following process:
         1.   The property owner(s) of the affected land, the City Council, or
the Planning and Zoning Commission may submit an application to the Zoning
Administrator to initiate the error correction process.
         2.   If the correction involves the redesignation of property or the
relocation of a zoning district boundary, the Zoning Administrator will process
the error correction as a zoning map amendment according to subsection 5.05.
Zoning Text and Map Amendments.
         3.   If the correction involves the correction of a typographical or
scrivener's error or updating the depiction of a property boundary that will
not result in the redesignation of any property or the relocation of any zoning
district boundary, the Zoning Administrator may update the Official Zoning
District Map.
         4.   The updated Official Zoning District Map will replace the
previous Official Zoning District Map.
         5.   The Zoning Administrator will record the change consistent with
subsection 1.04.B.
         6.   If, after application of the correction process, uncertainty
still exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown
on the Official Zoning District Map, the conflict shall be resolved by
utilizing the appeal power of the Board of Adjustment. If, because of error or
omission in the Official Zoning District Map, any property in the city is not
shown as being in a zoning district, such property shall be classified as SF-
20, Single-Family Dwelling District.
   1.04.   Zoning District Boundaries.
      A.   Boundary delineations. The zoning district boundary lines shown on
the Official Zoning District Map are usually along streets, alleys, property
lines, or extensions of these features. Where uncertainty exists as to the
boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning District Map, the
Zoning Administrator will apply the following rules of interpretation:
         1.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerline.
         2.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines.
         3.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the city limits
shall be construed as following the city limits.
         4.   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be
construed to follow the centerline of the railroad right-of- way.
         5.   Boundaries indicated as following the centerline of creeks,
streams, or drainage ways shall be construed to follow such centerline as
officially designated or recorded. If the centerline of the creek, stream, or
drainage way is not designated or recorded and the centerline changes, the
boundary shall be construed to move with such centerline.
         6.   Boundaries indicated as following the shorelines of lakes or
ponds shall be construed as following the shoreline of the lake or pond
depicted on the Official Zoning District Map.
         7.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
listed in subsection 1.04.A.1 through 1.04.A.6 shall be construed as following
the extension of those features.
         8.   The scale of the Official Zoning District Map shall determine
distances not indicated on the Official Zoning District Map.
         9.   Whenever City Council, by official action, vacates any street,
alley, or public way, the zoning district line adjoining each side of the
street, alley, or public way shall automatically extend to the centerline of
the vacated street, alley, or public way. All areas within the abandoned
street, alley, or public way are subject to all regulations of the extended
districts.
         10.   The zoning classification applied to a tract of land or lot
abutting a street extends automatically to the street centerline.
         11.   If physical features on the ground vary with information shown
on the Official Zoning District Map, or a question arises regarding zoning
boundary interpretation that the Zoning Administrator cannot resolve by
applying the rules of this subsection 1.04.A, the City Council shall classify
the zoning designation and boundary following a public hearing and
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      B.   Zoning upon annexation (zoned vs. interim).
         1.   All territory annexed to the city hereafter shall be temporarily
designated as A, Agricultural District until permanently zoned by City Council.
         2.   City Council shall establish zoning for any property it annexes
into the city as soon as practicable after annexation to give the newly annexed
territory a permanent zoning classification and the procedures to be followed
shall be the same as provided by law for the amendment of the zoning ordinance.
         3.   The owner of land annexed into the city may request a zoning
designation within six months with no fee applied to the request. If the owner
does not request a different zoning designation within six months of the
annexation action, the city will apply any fees typically associated with a
zoning change under subsection 5.05.
         4.   In an annexed area temporarily classified as A, Agricultural
District, no construction of a building other than those allowed in the A,
Agricultural District shall be permitted unless such construction has been
specifically authorized by Council and a permit issued. Construction of
buildings other than those permitted in A, Agricultural District may be
authorized in newly annexed areas prior to permanent zoning only in the
following manner:
            a.   An application for any use shall be made to the Zoning
Administrator. The application shall show the use contemplated, a plat showing
the size of the lot or tract of land proposed to be used, and the location,
size, and type of buildings proposed to be constructed.
            b.   Such application shall be referred by the Zoning Administrator
to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration.
            c.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make its
recommendation to the City Council after giving due consideration to the land
use plan for the area in which the application is located.
            d.   Whenever such a recommendation is filed with the City Council,
it shall be advisory only and the City Council may grant or deny the
application as the facts may justify.
            e.   If approved by the City Council, the applicant may apply for a
building permit provided the building permit application is consistent with
City Council authorization.
   1.05.   Compliance Required; Interpretation; Rules of Construction.
      A.   Compliance required. This Zoning Ordinance applies to all land,
buildings, structures, or appurtenances located within the City of Cleburne
that are in any way occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed,
demolished, or converted from one form or use to another.
      B.   Interpretation.
         1.   Restrictiveness. When the regulations in this Zoning Ordinance
conflict with conditions of another applicable law, ordinance, resolution,
rule, or regulation, the Zoning Administrator will apply the more restrictive
regulation where authorized by law.
         2.   Abrogation of private agreement. These Zoning Ordinance
regulations do not abrogate any easement, covenant, or other private agreement.
         3.   Cumulative effect. These Zoning Ordinance regulations are
cumulative. Where allowed by law, and where these regulations address the
subject matter of a resolution or ordinance, these regulations may impose
additional limitations upon existing resolutions and ordinances or those that
City Council may adopt in the future.
      C.   Rules of construction. The following rules of construction will
determine the interpretation of these Zoning Ordinance regulations:
         1.   Person or entity. “Person” includes any individual, developer,
corporation, organization, trust, LLC, or other entity authorized under these
Zoning Ordinance regulations to submit a development or zoning application.
         2.   Number. The singular number includes the plural and the plural
the singular.
         3.   Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and
the future the present.
         4.   Mandatory and permissive language. The words “shall” and “must”
are mandatory, and the word “may” is permissive.
         5.   Gender terms. Where any term includes a gender-specific pronoun,
the use of that term includes all gender.
         6.   Parentheses. Unless otherwise explicitly stated in the same
section, any word, term, number, abbreviation, or acronym that appears in
parentheses directly after a word, term, number, or phrase is intended to be
construed in the same sense as the word, term, number, or phrase that appears
immediately before the parenthetical. (For example, in the phrase "three (3)
feet," the written "three" and the parenthetical "(3)" are intended to
communicate the same distance in both a written and numeric format and are not
to be construed as separate units of distance.)
         7.   Conflicts. If there is a conflict between one or more sections of
this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator will interpret the applicable
regulation according to the following rules:
            a.   The applicable written text in the body of the Zoning
Ordinance controls over any charts, graphics, or footnotes in the Zoning
Ordinance; and
            b.   If a conflict arises between Section 155.2, Zoning Districts
and other sections in these Zoning Ordinance regulations, the other section
will govern.
   1.06.   Decision-Maker Authority.
   Table 1: Decision-Maker Authority
City Council Responsibilities
Subsection 5.05   Approving or denying zoning text and map amendments
Subsection 5.08   Approving or denying a PD, Planned Development District
Subsection 5.09   Approving or denying specific use permit (SUP)
Planning and Zoning Commission Responsibilities
Subsection 5.05   Recommending approval or denial of zoning text and map
                  amendments
Subsection 5.08   Recommending approval or denial of a PD, Planned Development
                  District
Subsection 5.09   Recommending approval or denial of Specific Use Permit (SUP)
Board of Adjustment Responsibilities
Subsection 5.10   Approving or denying amortization of nonconforming uses
Subsection 6.01   Approving or denying zoning regulation appeal
Subsection 6.02   Approving or denying zoning variance
Subsection 6.03   Approving or denying zoning special exception
Zoning Administrator Responsibilities
Subsection 1.03   Maintaining and processing updates to the Official Zoning
                  District Map
Subsection 1.05   Interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance
Subsection 5.01   Overseeing general application processing
Subsection 5.01.C Maintaining application forms
Subsection 5.01.E Determining completeness of zoning applications
Subsection 5.03   Approving or denying alternative compliance requests
Subsection 5.04   Issuing required public notice
Subsection 5.07   Approving or denying a site plan
Building Official Responsibilities
Subsection 5.06   Issuance of certificate of occupancy
 
(Ord. 04-2022-34, passed 4-12-22)
§ 155.2 ZONING DISTRICTS.
   2.01.   Zoning Districts Established.
      A.   Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to create zoning
districts, to specify the nature and components of the permitted development
and uses within them, and to establish regulations regarding the physical
character and intensity of development in order to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare.
      B.   Zoning districts established. All land within the corporate limits
shall be classified into one of the zoning districts listed in Table 2: Zoning
Districts.
   Table 2: Zoning Districts
Residential Zoning Districts
2.02.A A, Agricultural District
2.02.B SF-6, Single-Family Dwelling District
2.02.C SF-7, Single-Family Dwelling District
2.02.D SF-10, Single-Family Dwelling District
2.02.E SF-20, Single-Family Dwelling District
2.02.F MF-1, Medium-Density Residential District
2.02.G MF-2, High-Density Residential District
Nonresidential Zoning Districts
2.03.A NC, Neighborhood Commercial District
2.03.B LC, Local Commercial District
2.03.C RC, Regional Commercial District
2.03.D MU, Mixed Use District
2.03.E CI, Commercial/Industrial Flex District
2.03.F I, Industrial District
Special Zoning Districts
2.04.A H, Historic Overlay              2.04.G CS, Cleburne Station Overlay
2.04.B DTC, Downtown Core Overlay       2.04.H F, Freeway Overlay
2.04.C DTT, Downtown Transition Overlay 2.04.I AP, Airport Overlay
2.04.D NT, Neighborhood Transition      2.04.J PD, Planned Development District
       Overlay
2.04.E MS, Main Street Overlay          2.04.K IH, Interim Holding District
2.04.F HS, Henderson Street Overlay            
 
      C.   Equivalency table for zoning districts. Table 3: Zoning Districts
Equivalency Table identifies zoning districts adopted in previous ordinances
and the zoning district regulations that now apply in this Zoning Ordinance to
those districts.
   Table 3: Zoning Districts Equivalency Table
Previous Designation Applicable Zoning District
Previous Designation              Applicable Zoning District
Residential Zoning Districts
A, Agricultural District          A, Agricultural District
                                  SF-6, Single-Family Dwelling District
SF-3, SF-4, MH/SF-4, MH Districts SF-7, Single-Family Dwelling District
SF-2 District                     SF-10, Single-Family Dwelling District
SF-1 District                     SF-20, Single-Family Dwelling District
T, SF-A, D District               MF-1, Medium-Density Residential District
MF District                       MF-2, High-Density Residential District
Nonresidential Zoning Districts
                                  MU, Mixed Use District
C0 District                       NC, Neighborhood Commercial District
C1 District                       LC, Local Commercial District
C2, C3 Districts                  RC, Regional Commercial District
M1 District                       CI, Commercial/Industrial Flex District
M2 District                       I, Industrial District
Special Zoning Districts
C4, Private Club Overlay (ODC)
SUP, Specific Use Permit          Underlying zoning district with SUP suffix
IH, Interim Holding District      IH, Interim Holding District
PD, Planned Development District  PD, Planned Development District
H, Historic District Overlay      H, Historic Overlay
ODC, Original Downtown Overlay    DTC, Downtown Core Overlay
                                  DTT, Downtown Transition Overlay
                                  NT, Neighborhood Transition Overlay
                                  CS, Cleburne Station Overlay
                                  HS, Henderson Street Overlay and MS, Main
                                  Street Overlay
                                  AP, Airport Overlay
Commercial/Industrial Overlay     F, Freeway Overlay
 
   2.02.   Residential Zoning Districts.
      A.   A, Agricultural District.
         1.   Purpose statement. This district is intended to provide for
agricultural uses such as crops and livestock and certain businesses related to
agricultural uses.
         2.   Permitted uses and use regulations. See the Use Chart and all
applicable regulations.
         3.   Dimensional standards. See subsection 2.05.A Dimensional
Standards for Residential Districts and all applicable regulations in Section
155.4.
         4.   Development standards. See the following subsections:
            a.   See 4.01 Landscaping Requirements.
            b.   See 4.02 Screening Standards.
            c.   See 4.03 Parking Standards.
            d.   See 4.04 Lighting Standards.
            e.   See 4.05 Design Standards.
      B.   SF-6, Single-Family Dwelling District.
         1.   Purpose statement. This district is intended to provide for
development of single-family detached units and accessory uses and buildings
within a suburban neighborhood setting.
         2.   Permitted uses and use regulations. See the Use Chart and all
applicable regulations.
         3.   Dimensional standards. See subsection 2.05.A Dimensional
Standards for Residential Districts and all applicable regulations in Section
155.4.
         4.   Development standards. See the following subsections:
            a.   See 4.01 Landscaping Requirements.
            b.   See 4.02 Screening Standards.
            c.   See 4.03 Parking Standards.
            d.   See 4.04 Lighting Standards.
            e.   See 4.05 Design Standards.
      C.   SF-7, Single-Family Dwelling District.
         1.   Purpose statement. This district is intended to provide for
development of single-family detached dwelling units and accessory uses and
buildings within a suburban neighborhood setting.
         2.   Permitted uses and use regulations. See the Use Chart and all
applicable regulations.
         3.   Dimensional standards. See subsection 2.05.A Dimensional
Standards for Residential Districts and all applicable regulations in Section
155.4.
         4.   Development standards. See the following subsections:
            a.   See 4.01 Landscaping Requirements.
            b.   See 4.02 Screening Standards.
            c.   See 4.03 Parking Standards.
            d.   See 4.04 Lighting Standards.
            e.   See 4.05 Design Standards.
      D.   SF-10, Single-Family Dwelling District.
         1.   Purpose statement. This district is intended to provide for
development of single-family detached dwelling units and accessory uses and
buildings within a low-density neighborhood setting.
         2.   Permitted uses and use regulations. See the Use Chart and all
applicable regulations.
         3.   Dimensional standards. See subsection 2.05.A Dimensional
Standards for Residential Districts and all applicable regulations in Section
155.4.
         4.   Development standards. See the following subsections:
            a.   See 4.01 Landscaping Requirements.
            b.   See 4.02 Screening Standards.
            c.   See 4.03 Parking Standards.
            d.   See 4.04 Lighting Standards.
            e.   See 4.05 Design Standards.
      E.   SF-20, Single-Family Dwelling District.
         1.   Purpose statement. This district is intended to provide for
development of single-family detached dwelling units and accessory uses and
buildings on large lots within an estate or semi-rural neighborhood setting.
         2.   Permitted uses and use regulations. See the Use Chart and all
applicable regulations.
         3.   Dimensional standards. See subsection 2.05.A Dimensional
Standards for Residential Districts and all applicable regulations in Section
155.4.
         4.   Development standards. See the following subsections:
            a.   See 4.01 Landscaping Requirements.
            b.   See 4.02 Screening Standards.
            c.   See 4.03 Parking Standards.
            d.   See 4.04 Lighting Standards.
            e.   See 4.05 Design Standards.
      F.   MF-1, Medium-Density Residential District.
         1.   Purpose statement. This district is intended to provide for
development of medium-density residential, such as dwelling, single-family
(attached - duplex), dwelling, single-family (attached - townhouse), as well as
dwelling, multi-family that consists of no more than eight units on a single
lot.
         2.   Permitted uses and use regulations. See the Use Chart and all
applicable regulations.
         3.   Dimensional standards. See subsection 2.05.A Dimensional
Standards for Residential Districts and all applicable regulations in Section
155.4.
         4.   Development standards. See the following subsections:
            a.   See 4.01 Landscaping Requirements.
            b.   See 4.02 Screening Standards.
2022 S-80
            c.   See 4.03 Parking Standards.
            d.   See 4.04 Lighting Standards.
            e.   See 4.05 Design Standards.
      G.   MF-2, High-Density Residential District.
         1.   Purpose statement. This district is intended to provide for
development of attached residential units, such as multi-family developments
with nine or more units.
         2.   Permitted uses and use regulations. See the Use Chart and all
applicable regulations.
         3.   Dimensional standards. See subsection 2.05.A Dimensional
Standards for Residential Districts and all applicable regulations in Section
155.4.
         4.   Development standards. See the following subsections:
            a.   See 4.01 Landscaping Requirements.
            b.   See 4.02 Screening Standards.
            c.   See 4.03 Parking Standards.
            d.   See 4.04 Lighting Standards.
            e.   See 4.05 Design Standards.
      H.   D, Duplex Dwelling District.
         1.   Purpose statement. This district is intended to provide for
development of attached single-family residential units consisting of two units
on a single lot.
         2.   Permitted uses and use regulations.
            a.   See the Use Chart and all applicable regulations.
            b.   Duplexes are permitted within the MF-1 and MF-2 Districts with
conditional development standards.
         3.   Dimensional standards. See subsection 2.05.A Dimensional
Standards for Residential Districts and all applicable regulations in
Section 155.4.
         4.   Development standards. See the following subsections of Section
155.4:
            a.   See 4.01 Landscaping Requirements.
            b.   See 4.02 Screening Standards.
            c.   See 4.03 Parking Standards.
            d.   See 4.04 Lighting Standards.
            e.   See 4.05 Design Standards.
   2.03.   Nonresidential Zoning Districts.
      A.   NC, Neighborhood Commercial District.
         1.   Purpose statement. This district is intended to provide for
small-scale commercial retail, service, and professional office development in
a neighborhood context. Neighborhood commercial may share the same streets or
street network as dwellings that are accessed from neighborhood streets.
         2.   Permitted uses and use regulations. See the Use Chart and all
applicable regulations.
         3.   Dimensional standards. See subsection 2.05.B Dimensional
Standards for Nonresidential Districts and all applicable regulations in
Section
155.4.
         4.   Development standards. See the following subsections:
            a.   See 4.01 Landscaping Requirements.
            b.   See 4.02 Screening Standards.
            c.   See 4.03 Parking Standards.
            d.   See 4.04 Lighting Standards.
            e.   See 4.05 Design Standards.
      B.   LC, Local Commercial District.
         1.   Purpose statement. This district is intended to provide for
locations for various types of local retail trade and businesses primarily
serving clusters of neighborhoods or a particular sector of Cleburne. Local
commercial may be oriented along arterial or collector streets.
         2.   Permitted uses and use regulations. See the Use Chart and all
applicable regulations.
         3.   Dimensional standards. See subsection 2.05.B Dimensional
Standards for Nonresidential Districts and all applicable regulations in
Section
155.4.
         4.   Development standards. See the following subsections:
            a.   See 4.01 Landscaping Requirements.
            b.   See 4.02 Screening Standards.
            c.   See 4.03 Parking Standards.
            d.   See 4.04 Lighting Standards.
            e.   See 4.05 Design Standards.
      C.   RC, Regional Commercial District.
         1.   Purpose statement. This district is intended to provide locations
for commercial, retail, and service uses that serve Cleburne and the
surrounding area. Regional commercial is primarily oriented along arterial
roadways and the frontage of limited access highways.
         2.   Permitted uses and use regulations. See the Use Chart and all
applicable regulations.
         3.   Dimensional standards. See subsection 2.05.B Dimensional
Standards for Nonresidential Districts and all applicable regulations in
Section
155.4.
         4.   Development standards. See the following subsections:
            a.   See 4.01 Landscaping Requirements.
            b.   See 4.02 Screening Standards.
            c.   See 4.03 Parking Standards.
            d.   See 4.04 Lighting Standards.
            e.   See 4.05 Design Standards.
      D.   MU, Mixed Use District.
         1.   Purpose statement.
            a.   Mixed use refers to a development that combines residential
and nonresidential zoning categories within one defined zoning district. For
example, residential, restaurants, retail, office, and public uses may be
allowed in the same building, lot, or block with a shared structure, walls,
street access, and utilities.
            b.   This district is intended to permit the establishment of
integrated residential and nonresidential activities where appropriate and
desirable, under conditions that ensure an acceptable level of harmony among
land uses.
         2.   Permitted uses and use regulations. See the Use Chart and all
applicable regulations.
         3.   Dimensional standards. See subsection 2.05.B Dimensional
Standards for Nonresidential Districts and all applicable regulations in
Section
155.4.
         4.   Development standards. See the following subsections:
            a.   See 4.01 Landscaping Requirements.
            b.   See 4.02 Screening Standards.
            c.   See 4.03 Parking Standards.
            d.   See 4.04 Lighting Standards.
            e.   See 4.05 Design Standards.
      E.   CI, Commercial/Industrial Flex District.
         1.   Purpose statement.
            a.   The CI, Commercial/Industrial Flex District is intended for
heavier commercial or light industrial uses such as contractor businesses,
auto-oriented businesses, production, and associated office uses.
            b.   The CI, Commercial/Industrial Flex District is intended to act
as an intermediate district between retail-oriented districts such as LC, Local
Commercial District and RC, Regional Commercial District and districts that are
more oriented to manufacturing and the use of industrial processes. Uses in the
CI District do not produce significant amounts of noise, vibration, dust, or
odor beyond the property line. This district may act as a buffering district
between more sensitive commercial and residential districts and the I,
Industrial District where permitted uses tend to produce these effects.
         2.   Permitted uses and use regulations. See the Use Chart and all
applicable regulations.
         3.   Dimensional standards. See subsection 2.05.B Dimensional
Standards for Nonresidential Districts and all applicable regulations in
Section
155.4.
         4.   Development standards. See the following subsections:
            a.   See 4.01 Landscaping Requirements.
            b.   See 4.02 Screening Standards.
            c.   See 4.03 Parking Standards.
            d.   See 4.04 Lighting Standards.
            e.   See 4.05 Design Standards.
      F.   I, Industrial District.
         1.   Purpose.
            a.   The I, Industrial District is intended for large-scale basic
or primary industrial uses that involve extensive processing, manufacturing,
and assembly of products or equipment, along with uses such as distribution,
rail, and intermodal facilities.
            b.   Uses within the I, Industrial District are presumed to utilize
large equipment and semi-trucks and should be located along arterial or
collector roadway corridors to maximize access and minimize truck traffic
through existing or future residential and retail areas.
            c.   Because of the nature of the products or character of
activities, uses in the district may produce sound, dust, vibration, or odors
beyond the boundaries of the property on which the use is located. These uses
should be buffered by similar uses where possible and located away from areas
that are primarily residential, retail, or mixed-use.
         2.   Permitted uses and use regulations. See the Use Chart and all
applicable regulations.
         3.   Dimensional standards. See subsection 2.05.B Dimensional
Standards for Nonresidential Districts and all applicable regulations in
Section
155.4.
         4.   Development standards. See the following subsections for
development standards.
            a.   See 4.01 Landscaping Requirements.
            b.   See 4.02 Screening Standards.
            c.   See 4.03 Parking Standards.
            d.   See 4.04 Lighting Standards.
            e.   See 4.05 Design Standards.
   2.04.   Special Districts.
      A.   H, Historic Overlay.
         1.   Purpose. The purpose of the H, Historic Overlay is to protect,
enhance, and preserve areas of Cleburne that the community recognizes as
historic landmarks due to their contribution to the culture, prosperity,
education, and welfare of the community.
         2.   Boundaries and applicability.
            a.   The Historic Overlay boundaries are those indicated on the
Official Zoning District Map.
            b.   Within the boundaries indicated on the Official Zoning
District Map, the H, Historic Overlay applies to any building or property of
historical, architectural, archaeological, or cultural importance or value that
merit protection, enhancement, and preservation.
            c.   The City Council may designate certain buildings, properties,
or districts as historic landmarks and, in doing so, extend the boundaries of
the H, Historic Overlay through the process outlined in subsection 5.05 and
based on an affirmative finding that the building, property, or district
contribute to the following:
               (1)   Character, interest, or value as part of the development,
heritage, or cultural characteristics of the city, state, or the United States;
               (2)   Identification with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the culture and development of Cleburne;
               (3)   Location as the site of a significant historical event or
public pride;
               (4)   Exemplification of the cultural, economic, social, or
historical heritage of Cleburne;
               (5)   Relationship to other contributing buildings, sites, or
areas that are eligible for preservation based on historical, cultural, or
architectural significance;
               (6)   Unique physical or aesthetic features not commonly found
elsewhere in the city.
         3.   New development, redevelopment, and allowed uses.
            a.   New development and redevelopment in the H, Historic Overlay
are governed by subsection 4.05.
            b.   Use of property in the H, Historic Overlay is governed by the
underlying zoning district (see subsection 3.03).
      B.   DTC, Downtown Core Overlay.
         1.   Purpose. The purpose of the DTC, Downtown Core Overlay is to
further the vision and recommendations of the Downtown Master Plan and to
protect, enhance, and preserve the character of Cleburne's historic downtown by
ensuring that new development and uses in this district are compatible with the
character and uses that define the original downtown.
         2.   Boundaries and applicability.
            a.   The DTC, Downtown Core Overlay boundaries are shown in Figure
1.
            b.   Within the boundaries shown below, the DTC, Downtown Core
Overlay applies to any building or property.
            c.   The City Council may extend or modify the boundaries of the
DTC, Downtown Core Overlay through the process outlined in subsection 5.05 and
affirmative finding that the property proposed for inclusion in the overlay
contributes to the character of the original Downtown.
         3.   New development, redevelopment, and allowed uses.
            a.   New development and redevelopment in the DTC, Downtown Core
Overlay are governed by subsection 4.06.D.
            b.   Use of property in the DTC, Downtown Core Overlay is governed
by the underlying zoning district (see subsection 3.03).
         4.   Standards not applicable. Development in the DTC, Downtown Core
Overlay is exempt from certain parking, landscaping, and dimensional
requirements as specified in subsection 4.06.D.2.d.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7798.png]
 
      C.   DTT, Downtown Transition Overlay.
         1.   Purpose. The purpose of the DTT, Downtown Transition Overlay is
to preserve the look and feel of historic Downtown Cleburne and abutting areas
and encourage the development of mixed commercial and residential uses while
ensuring that new development or modifications to existing development conform
to the historic pattern and style established in downtown.
         2.   Boundaries and applicability. 
            a.   The DTT, Downtown Transition Overlay boundaries are shown in
Figure 2.
            b.   Within the boundaries shown below, the DTT, Downtown
Transition Overlay applies to any building or property.
            c.   The City Council may extend or modify the boundaries of the
DTT, Downtown Transition Overlay through the process outlined in subsection
5.05 and affirmative finding that the property proposed for inclusion in the
overlay contributes to the character of the original downtown.
         3.   New development, redevelopment, and allowed uses.
            a.   New development and redevelopment in the DTT, Downtown
Transition Overlay are governed by subsection 4.06.E.
            b.   Use of property in the DTT, Downtown Transition Overlay is
governed by the underlying zoning district (see subsection 3.03).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7796.png]
 
      D.   NT, Neighborhood Transition Overlay.
         1.   Purpose. The purpose of the NT, Neighborhood Transition Overlay
is to provide for appropriate development and redevelopment in neighborhoods
that offer a mixture of residential housing types and provide for a gradual
transition from more intense nonresidential uses in the I, Industrial District,
MS, Main Street Overlay, and HS, Henderson Street Overlay.
         2.   Boundaries and applicability. 
            a.   The NT, Neighborhood Transition Overlay boundaries are
depicted below.
            b.   Within the boundaries of the NT, Neighborhood Transition
Overlay, the standards of the NT, Neighborhood Transition Overlay apply to any
building or property.
            c.   The City Council may extend or modify the boundaries of the
NT, Neighborhood Transition Overlay through the process outlined in subsection
5.05.
         3.   New development, redevelopment, and allowed uses. Uses in the NT,
Neighborhood Transition Overlay are governed by the underlying zoning district
(see subsection 3.03) with the following exceptions:
            a.   On any block, single-family detached residential uses are
allowed by right and duplex uses are allowed by specific use permit (SUP) where
not allowed by right in the underlying zoning.
            b.   On any corner lot zoned SF and bounded by at least two public
streets, townhome and nonresidential uses may be allowed by SUP.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7794.png]
 
      E.   MS, Main Street Overlay.
         1.   Purpose.
            a.   The purpose of the MS, Main Street Overlay is to provide land
development standards along Main Street that enhance the corridor along the
primary thoroughfare in the City of Cleburne.
            b.   The MS, Main Street Overlay does not apply to property zoned
for residential use, zoned I, Industrial District, or developed as a public use
or building or play field or stadium.
         2.   Boundaries and applicability.
            a.   All parcels and lots with frontage or access to Main Street
between the F, Freeway Overlay to the north and the south junction with Highway
171 and as shown in Figure 4.
            b.   Within the boundaries described in a above, the MS, Main
Street Overlay applies to any building or property.
            c.   The MS, Main Street Overlay does not apply to lots or parcels
within H, Historic Overlay, the DTC, Downtown Core Overlay, or the F, Freeway
Overlay.
         3.   New development, redevelopment, and allowed uses. New development
and redevelopment in the MS, Main Street Overlay is governed by subsection 4.05
Design Standards.
         4.   Use of property in the MS, Main Street Overlay is governed by the
underlying zoning district (see subsection 3.03).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7792.png]
 
      F.   HS, Henderson Street Overlay.
         1.   Purpose.
            a.   The purpose of the HS, Henderson Street Overlay is to provide
land development standards along Henderson Street that maintain and enhance the
corridor as a major thoroughfare in the City of Cleburne.
            b.   The HS, Henderson Street Overlay does not apply to property
zoned for residential use, zoned I, Industrial District, or developed as a
public use or building or play field or stadium.
         2.   Boundaries and applicability.
            a.   All parcels and lots with frontage or access to Henderson
Street between the east and west junction with Highway 67 and as shown in
Figure 5.
            b.   Within the boundaries described in a. above, the HS, Henderson
Street Overlay applies to any building or property.
            c.   The HS, Henderson Street Overlay does not apply to lots or
parcels within the H, Historic Overlay, the DTC, Downtown Core Overlay, or the
F, Freeway Overlay.
         3.   New development, redevelopment, and allowed uses.
            a.   New development and redevelopment in the HS, Henderson Street
Overlay is governed by subsection 4.05. Design Standards.
            b.   Use of property in the HS, Henderson Street Overlay is
governed by the underlying zoning district (see subsection 3.03).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7790.png]
 
      G.   CS, Cleburne Station Overlay.
         1.   Purpose. The purpose of the CS, Cleburne Station Overlay is to
ensure the commercial viability of the depot by establishing and maintaining a
mixed-use form and character with a strategic balance of commercial, retail,
entertainment, and residential uses.
         2.   Boundaries and applicability.
            a.   Within the boundaries shown in Figure 6, the CS, Cleburne
Station Overlay applies to any building or property.
            b.   The F, Freeway Overlay does not apply within the CS, Cleburne
Station Overlay.
         3.   New development, redevelopment, and allowed uses.
            a.   New development and redevelopment in the CS, Cleburne Station
Overlay are governed by subsection 4.05 Design Standards.
            b.   Use of property in the CS, Cleburne Station Overlay is
governed by the underlying zoning district (see subsection 3.03) with the
addition that mixed-use buildings are allowed in the CS, Cleburne Station
Overlay.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7788.png]
 
      H.   F, Freeway Overlay.
         1.   Purpose. The purpose of the F, Freeway Overlay is to provide land
development standards along the U.S. Highway 67 loop and Chisholm Trail Parkway
that maintain and enhance the corridor as a principal freeway corridor and
gateway to the City of Cleburne.
         2.   Boundaries and applicability.
            a.   All parcels and lots within 500 feet of the U.S. Highway 67
and Chisholm Trail Parkway right-of-way or that have frontage or access to U.S.
Highway 67 within the city limits and as shown in Figure 7 and Figure 8.
            b.   Within the boundaries described in a above, the F, Freeway
Overlay applies to any building or property.
            c.   The F, Freeway Overlay does not apply to lots or parcels
within the CS, Cleburne Station Overlay or lots or parcels in the A,
Agricultural District or any residential zoning districts.
            d.   As part of the initial zoning action (see subsection 1.04.B)
City Council may apply or extend the boundaries of the F, Freeway Overlay to
additional territory when that territory is annexed into the city.
         3.   New development, redevelopment, and allowed uses.
            a.   New development and redevelopment in the F, Freeway Overlay
are governed by subsection 4.05 Design Standards.
            b.   Use of property in the F, Freeway Overlay is governed by the
underlying zoning district (see subsection 3.03).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7786.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7784.png]
 
      I.   AP, Airport Overlay.
         1.   Purpose. The purpose of the AP, Airport Overlay is to regulate
uses in the areas surrounding Cleburne Regional Airport, particularly within
those areas that the city and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
considers crucial to the continued operation of the airport.
         2.   FAA approval required. For property located within the AP,
Airport Overlay, the city may require that an applicant demonstrate that the
FAA has reviewed and commented on the application and that the applicant has
addressed changes requested by the FAA before approving any variance from the
standards of this Zoning Ordinance.
      J.   PD, Planned Development District.
         1.   Purpose. The purpose of the PD, Planned Development District is
to allow for creative and exceptional design within a unique physical, natural,
or market context where the standards provided in the PD create a balance that
compensates for any deviations from or reductions in the standards required in
this Zoning Ordinance. A PD, Planned Development District may designate a
planned development that existed before adoption of this Zoning Ordinance, or
it may designate a new planned development that establishes new or innovative
concepts in design, mixture or uses, or land preservation that are not
envisioned or not provided for by this Zoning Ordinance.
         2.   Applicability.
            a.   The PD designation shall not be used solely to obtain zoning
variances from development standards. In deciding whether to approve a PD, the
Applicant should address, and the Planning and Zoning Commission and City
Council should consider, the following:
               (1)   The complexity of the proposed development, and whether
the development will require master planning over several years from initiation
to completion;
                  (a)   Develop property across multiple phases; or
                  (b)   Involve multiple developers with different areas of
expertise such as commercial, residential, entertainment, or healthcare
facilities;
               (2)   Whether the proposed development conforms to specific
goals of the comprehensive plan , subsection 1.01, and the purpose statements
of proposed base districts as found in this Section
155.2; and
               (3)   Whether the proposed development preserves natural
features, open space, and other topographical features of the land; or
               (4)   Whether the property in question is inherently difficult
to develop due to irregular shape, size, or topography.
            b.   City Council is not obligated to approve a requested PD,
Planned Development District.
         3.   Base Zoning District.
            a.   A PD may contain at least one base zoning district listed in
this Section
155.2, other than a special district listed in subsection 2.04, to regulate all
uses and development regulations not modified by the PD ordinance.
            b.   City Council may approve any combination of uses listed in
subsection 3.03 by approval of the PD ordinance.
         4.   Dimensional regulations. See subsection 2.05 and Section
155.4.
         5.   Application processing. See subsection 5.08.
      K.   IH, Interim Holding District.
         1.   Purpose. The IH, Interim Holding District applies only to
properties annexed and zoned IH, Interim Holding District prior to adoption of
this Zoning Ordinance that did not thereafter have a permanent zoning district
applied.
         2.   Applicability and restrictions.
            a.   The procedure for establishing zoning on annexed territory
shall conform to the requirements and provisions of subsection 1.04.B for
property zoned at the time of annexation and subsection 5.05 for property zoned
after annexation.
            b.   No person shall erect or construct a building or structure or
expand an existing building or structure in any newly annexed territory without
first obtaining a building permit and certificate of occupancy.
            c.   The Building Official shall not issue a building permit or
certificate of occupancy to allow construction other than a use permitted in
the SF-20, Single-Family Dwelling District or an agricultural use.
   2.05.   Dimensional Standards Table.
      A.   Dimensional Standards for Residential Districts.
Regulation A SF-6 SF-7 SF-10 SF-20 MF-1 MF-2 D
Regulation  A          SF-6      SF-7        SF-10   SF-20   MF-1      MF-2       D
Lot Dimensions
                                                             10,000
                       6,000 sq.                             sq. ft.
                       ft.                                   Townhomes 10,000 sq.
            2 acres    (average)                             = 3,500   ft.
Minimum Lot (87,120    5,000 (up 7,000 sq.   10,000  20,000  sq. ft.   Townhomes  7,000 sq.
Area        sq. ft.)   to 10% of ft.1        sq. ft. sq. ft. Duplex    = 3,500    ft.
                       total                                 units =   sq. ft.
                       lots)                                 7,000 sq. per unit
                                                             ft. per
                                                             building
                                                             100 ft.
                                                             Townhomes
                                                             = 35 ft.
Minimum Lot                                                  per unit  100 ft.    70 ft. per
Width:                                                       Duplex    Townhomes  building
Interior    150 ft.    50 ft.    60 ft.1     80 ft.  120 ft. units =   = 35 ft.   35 ft. per
Lot                                                          70 ft.    per unit   unit
                                                             per
                                                             building
                                                             (35 ft.
                                                             per unit)
                                                             100 ft.
                                                             Townhomes
                                                             = 47 ft.
                                                             per unit
                                                             Duplex
Minimum Lot                                                  units =   100 ft.    75 ft. per
Width:      150 ft.    55 ft.    65 ft.1     75 ft.  120 ft. 75 ft.    Townhomes  building
Corner Lot                                                   per       = 47 ft.   40 ft. per
                                                             building  per unit   unit
                                                             (40 ft.
                                                             for
                                                             corner
                                                             duplex
                                                             unit)
Minimum Lot
Depth (lots
on cul-de-
sacs,
eyebrows,
and knuckle 100 ft.    110 ft.   110 ft.1    125 ft. 150 ft. 100 ft.   100 ft.    100 ft.
turns may
reduce the
minimum lot
depth by 10
ft.)
                                                             16        28
Maximum     N/A        N/A       N/A1        N/A     N/A     dwelling  dwelling   N/A
Density                                                      units per units per
                                                             acre      acre
Yard Setback Dimensions                                                            
                                                                       5 ft. (0
                                                                       ft. build-
                                                                       to line in
Minimum                          30 ft. or                             Downtown
Front Yard  40 ft.     25 ft.    established 30 ft.  30 ft.  10 ft.    Overlay    25 ft.
Setback                          build line                            and
                                                                       Cleburne
                                                                       Depot
                                                                       Overlay)
Minimum
Front Yard
Setback -
If lot is
served by a                                                            0 ft. (0
paved alley                                                            ft. build-
and no                                                                 to line in
front entry                                                            Downtown
is provided 40 ft.     15 ft.    20 ft.      20 ft.  20 ft.  5 ft.     Overlay    20 ft.
or allowed                                                             and
(i.e., no                                                              Cleburne
driveway                                                               Depot
may be in                                                              Overlay)
the front
yard and
access must
be from the
alley)
                                                             0 ft.
                                                             between
                                                             attached
                                                             units or
                                                             one side  0 ft.
Minimum                                                      of zero   between
Side Yard                                                    lot line  attached
Setback:    40 ft.     5 ft.     7 ft.       7 ft.   15 ft.  unit;     units;     5 ft.
Interior                                                     7 ft.     10 ft.
Lot                                                          minimum   between
                                                             on end    end units
                                                             units or
                                                             one size
                                                             of zero
                                                             lot line
                                                             unit
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback:
Corner Lot  40 ft.     10 ft.    12 ft.      12 ft.  15 ft.  12 ft.    15 ft.     10 ft.
- Exterior
(Street)
Yard
                                                                       20 ft.
Minimum                                                                plus 1 ft.
Rear Yard                                                              for each
Setback:                                                               additional
Where an                                                               foot in
alley       20 ft.     20 ft.    20 ft.      20 ft.  20 ft.  20 ft.    height     20 ft.
adjoins the                                                            above 25
rear lot                                                               ft. when
line                                                                   adjacent
                                                                       to an SF
                                                                       District
            1 story
Minimum     structure
Rear Yard   = 20 ft.
Setback:    (25 ft.
Where no    when
alley       property   20 ft.    20 ft.      20 ft.  20 ft.  20 ft.    20 ft.     20 ft.
adjoins the abuts SF
rear lot    District);
line        2 story
            structure
            = 30 ft.
Floor Area                                                                         
                                                             500 sq.   500 sq.
                                                             ft. per 1 ft. per 1
                                                             bedroom   bedroom
                                                             unit,     unit,
                                                             loft, or  loft, or
                                                             studio;   studio;
Minimum     N/A        1,000 sq. 1,350 sq.   1,750   1,750   950 sq.   950 sq.    1,000 sq.
Floor Area             ft.       ft.         sq. ft. sq. ft. ft. per 2 ft. per 2  ft.
                                                             bedroom   bedroom
                                                             unit; 150 unit; 150
                                                             sq. ft.   sq. ft.
                                                             per each  per each
                                                             add'l     add'l room
                                                             room
Structure Height                                                                   
Maximum                40 ft./               40 ft./ 40 ft./ 45 ft./              40 ft./2.5
Height      40 ft./2.5 2.5       40 ft./2.5  2.5     2.5     3         60 ft./    storiesO>SF-
(feet/      stories    stories   stories     stories stories stories2  4 stories2 7SF-10SF-
stories)                                                                          20MF-1MF-2D
Building Area Coverage                                                             
Maximum Lot
Area
Allowed to
Be Covered
by
Buildings   60%        60%       50%         50%     65%     65%       80%        65%
(percentage
includes
all
buildings
and areas
under roof)
1See subsection 3.07.E.4.c for substandard replatting exemptions
2See subsection 4.05.C for building height and design for single-family and duplex adjacency
 
      B.   Dimensional Standards for Nonresidential districts.
Regulation NC LC RC MU CI I PD
Regulation NC        LC        RC        MU        CI        I         PD
Lot Dimensions
           7,800 sq. 8,500 sq.
Minimum    ft.; none ft.; none 8,500 sq.           10,000    43,560 (1
Lot Area1  within    within    ft.       N/A       sq. ft.   acre)     N/A
           Downtown  Downtown
           Overlay   Overlay
           65 ft.;   70 ft.;             100 ft.;
Minimum    25 ft.    25 ft.              25 ft.
Lot Width  within    within    70 ft.    within    100 ft.   100 ft.
           Downtown  Downtown            Downtown                      According
           Overlay   Overlay             Overlay                       to the PD
           120 ft.;  120 ft.;            120 ft.;                      ordinance
Minimum    80 ft.    80 ft.              80 ft.
Lot Depth  within    within    120 ft.   within    120 ft.   N/A
           Downtown  Downtown            Downtown
           Overlay   Overlay             Overlay
Yard Setback Dimensions
           5 ft.;    10 ft.;   15 ft.;
Minimum    none      none      none
Front Yard within    within    within    None      15 ft.    25 ft.
Setback    Downtown  Downtown  Cleburne
           Overlay   Overlay   Depot
                               Overlay
           When not  When not            When not
           adjacent  adjacent            adjacent
           to SF     to SF     When not  to SF     When not  When not
           district: district: adjacent  district: adjacent  adjacent
           5 ft.;    5 ft.;    to SF     5 ft.;    to SF     to SF
Minimum    when      when      district: when      district: district:
Side Yard  adjacent  adjacent  5 ft.;    adjacent  5 ft.;    5 ft.;
Setback    to SF     to SF     when      to SF     when      when
           district: district: adjacent  district: adjacent  adjacent
           15 ft.;   15 ft.;   to SF     15 ft.;   to SF     to SF     According
           in        in        district: in        district: district: to the PD
           Downtown  Downtown  25 ft.    Downtown  25 ft.    50 ft.    ordinance
           Overlay:  Overlay:            Overlay:
           0 ft.     0 ft.               0 ft.
           When not  When not            When not
           adjacent  adjacent            adjacent
           to SF     to SF     When not  to SF     When not  When not
           district: district: adjacent  district: adjacent  adjacent
           5 ft.;    5 ft.;    to SF     5 ft.;    to SF     to SF
Minimum    when      when      district: when      district: district:
Rear Yard  adjacent  adjacent  5 ft.;    adjacent  5 ft.;    5 ft.;
Setback    to SF     to SF     when      to SF     when      when
           District: District: adjacent  district: adjacent  adjacent
           10 ft.;   15 ft.;   to SF     10 ft.;   to SF     to SF
           in        in        district: in        district: district:
           Downtown  Downtown  25 ft.    Downtown  25 ft.    50 ft.
           Overlay:  Overlay:            Overlay:
           0 ft.     0 ft.               0 ft.
Structure Height
                                         70 ft./
                                         5
Maximum                                  stories;            No
Height     40 ft./   40 ft./   50 ft./   40 ft./   70 //ft./ maximum/  According
(feet/     3         3         4         3 stories 5         5         to the PD
stories)   stories3  stories3  stories3  if        stories3  stories3  ordinance3
                                         property
                                         abuts SF
                                         District3
Building Area Coverage
Maximum
Building   80%; 100% 80%; 100%           85%; 100%                     According
Area       within    within    65%       within    65%       60%       to the PD
Coverage   Downtown  Downtown            Downtown                      ordinance
(all       Overlay   Overlay             Overlay
buildings)
3See subsection 4.05.C for building height and design for single-family and
duplex adjacency
 
(Ord. 04-2022-34, passed 4-12-22; Am. Ord. 02-2023-09, passed 2-28-23)
§ 155.3 ZONING LAND USE REGULATIONS.
   3.01.   Uses Permitted by District. A person may use land and buildings in
each of the zoning districts listed in Section
155.2 for any uses specified in subsection 3.03 Use Chart. No person shall use
land or erect, alter, or convert a building or structure for any use other than
those specified as a permitted use in the district where the property is
located.
 
Legend for Use Chart
P       Use permitted in the district.
[blank] Use prohibited in the district.
S       Use permitted in the district upon approval of a specific use permit
        (SUP).
        Use permitted in the district if the use complies with conditional
P-#     development standards or limitations in the corresponding numeric
        endnote reference to subsection 3.04 Conditional Development Standards.
        Use permitted in the district after approval of a specific use permit
S-#     (SUP) and if the use complies with conditional development standards or
        limitations in the corresponding numeric endnote reference to
        subsection 3.04 Conditional Development Standards.
 
   3.02.   Classification of New and Unlisted Uses.
      A.   Existence of new and unlisted uses. Any use not listed in subsection
3.03 Use Chart or that operates in conflict with the definition of the use in
Section
155.7 is prohibited.
      B.   Zoning Administrator interpretation of a new and unlisted use.
         1.   If the Zoning Administrator cannot classify a proposed use under
an existing listed use, the Zoning Administrator may initiate a zoning text
amendment (see subsection 5.05).
         2.   Any person requesting a use not listed in subsection 3.03 may
submit an application to the Zoning Administrator to amend the Use Chart (see
subsection 5.05).
   3.03.   Use Chart.
Legend for
Use Chart,                                                      Parking
see        A SF-6 SF-7 SF-10 SF-20 MF-1 MF-2 NC LC RC MU CI I D Requirements
subsection
3.01
Legend for Use
Chart, see     A  SF- SF- SF- SF- MF- MF- NC LC RC MU  CI  I   D   Parking
subsection        6   7   10  20  1   2                            Requirements
3.01
Residential Uses
Boarding House                    P   P            P               1:room
Community Home    P   P   P   P   P   P            P               2
I
Community Home                    S   S   S  P  P  S   P           1:4 rooms
II
Dwelling,                                                      P-
Single-Family  P  P   P   P   P                                10  2
(Detached)
Dwelling,
Single-Family     S               P-  P-                       P   2:unit
(Attached -                       11  11
Duplex)
Dwelling,
Single-Family                     P   P            P               2:unit
(Attached -
Townhouse)
Dwelling,
Multi-Family,                     P   P            P               1.5:unit
3-8 Units
Dwelling,
Multi-Family,                     S   P            P               1.75:unit
9 or More
Units
Guest House/   P- P-  P-  P-  P-
In-Law         11 11  11  11  11                                   1
Quarters
Industrialized    P-  P-  P-  P-                   P-              2
Housing           16  16  16  16                   16
Live Work Unit                            S        P               2:unit
Manufactured   S  S   S   S   S                                    2
Home
Mobile Home
Parks, Trailer
Parks, Trailer S  S-  S-          S-                               2:unit
Courts, or        17  17          17
Trailer
Subdivisions
On-Premise                                P  P  P  P   P   P       1
Residence
Retirement                        P   P            P               1.5:unit
Housing
Nonresidential Uses
Accessory
Building (see  P  P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P   P   P   N/A
subsection
3.08)
Adult Day-Care                            P  P  S  P               1:400 + 1:
Services                                                           employee
Agricultural   P-                                                  N/A
Use            1
Airport or                                                         1:1,000 sq.
Airport                                                S   S       ft.
Facility
Alcoholic
Beverage Sales                               S- S-                 1:100 sq.
and Service                                  2  2  S-2             ft.
(on-site
consumption)
Alcohol Sales                                P- P-                 1:250 sq.
(off-premises                                3  3  P-3             ft.
consumption)
Alternative                                  P- P-                 1:250 sq.
Financial                                    4  4  P-4             ft.
Establishment
Ambulance                                    S  P  S   P           1:400 sq.
Service                                                            ft.
Amusement,                                                         1:400 sq.
Commercial                                   P  P  P   P           ft.
(Indoors)
Amusement,     S-                               S-                 1:400 sq.
Commercial     5                                5      P-5         ft.
(Outdoors)
Animal Shelter
or Pet                                                             1:1,000 sq.
Boarding (with S                                P      P   P       ft.
Outside Yard/
Kennels)
Animal Shelter
or Pet
Boarding       P                          P  P  P  P   P   P       1:1,000 sq.
(without                                                           ft.
Outside Yard/
Kennels)
Antique Shop                              P  P  P  P               1:400 sq.
                                                                   ft.
Art Gallery or                            P  P  P  P               1:400 sq.
Museum                                                             ft.
Artisan’s    P                          P  P  P  P   P   P       1:1,000 sq.
Workshop                                                           ft.
Auction House                                          S   S       1:400 sq.
                                                                   ft.
Automobile                                   S- S-     S-6 P-6     1:400 sq.
Body Shop                                    6  6                  ft.
Automobile or
Other                                        S- P-                 1:400 sq.
Motorized                                    6  6      P-6         ft.
Vehicle Sales
and Service
Automobile                                   P  P      P           1:250 sq.
Parts Store                                                        ft.
Automobile                                S- S- P- S-6 P-6         1:400 sq.
Rental                                    6  6  6                  ft.
Automobile                                                 S-6     1:1,000 sq.
Salvage                                                            ft.
Automobile                                      S-                 1:bay and 1:
Service Garage                                  6      S-6 P-6     400 sq. ft.
(Major)                                                            office
Automobile                                   P- P-                 1:bay or 1:
Service Garage                               6  6      P-6         400 sq. ft.
(Minor)
Automobile                                                         1:400 sq.
Wrecker and                                            S-6 P-6     ft.
Impound Lot
Bail Bond                                    S  S  S   P           1:400 sq.
Services                                                           ft.
Bakery                                       P  P  P               1:250 sq.
(Retail)                                                           ft.
Bank or                                                            1:400 sq.
Financial                                 P  P  P  P               ft.
Institution
Banquet Hall                                 S- S- S-7             1:3 seats
                                             7  7
Bed and        S  S               S       S  S     S               1:room + 2
Breakfast Inn
Book Store                                P  P  P  P               1:400 sq.
                                                                   ft.
                                                                   3:lane + 1:
Bowling Alley                                S  P  S               1,000 sq.
                                                                   ft.
                                                                   1:1,000 sq.
Brewery or                                   P- P- P-8 P-8 P-8     ft. + 1:250
Distillery                                   8  8                  sq. ft.
                                                                   taproom
Brewpub                                      P- P- P-8 P-8 P-8     1:200 sq.
                                             8  8                  ft.
Car Wash, Full                               P- P-                 1:400 sq.
Service                                      6  6  S-6             ft. waiting
                                                                   area
Car Wash, Self                               P- P- S-6             1:bay
Service                                      6  6
Carpentry Shop P                          S  P  P  S   P   P       1:1,000 sq.
                                                                   ft.
Catering       S                          P  P  P  P   S   S       1:400 sq.
Service                                                            ft.
Cement Storage                                         S   S       1:250 sq.
                                                                   ft. office
Cemetery or    P  P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P   P   P   N/A
Mausoleum
Ceramic and                                                        1:400 sq.
Pottery        P                          S  S  S  S   P   P       ft.
Manufacturer
Child Care
Home (Up to 6  P  P   P   P   P   S   S            S           S   2 additional
Children)
Child Care
Home (7 or     P  S   S   S   S   S   S                        S   2 additional
More Children)
Child Care
Facility       S  S   S   S   S   S   S   S  S  S  S           S   1:250 sq.
(Children's                                                        ft.
Home)
Child Care                                                         1:400 sq.
Facility (Day- S  S   S   S   S   S   S   P  P  P  P   P       S   ft. + 1:
Care Center)                                                       employee
Civic/                                                             1:400 sq.
Convention                                   P  P  P   P           ft.
Center
Community
Center,           P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P       P   1:400 sq.
Private or                                                         ft.
Clubhouse
Concrete or
Asphalt                                                            1:250 sq.
Batching                                                   S       ft. office
Plant,
Permanent
Concrete or
Asphalt        P-                         P- P- P-
Batching       9  P-9 P-9 P-9 P-9 P-9 P-9 9  9  9  P-9 P-9 P-9 P-9 N/A
Plant,
Temporary
Consignment                                  P  P  P   P           1:250 sq.
Store                                                              ft.
Contractor's                                    S-     P-  P-      1:400 sq.
Shop or                                         19     19  1 9     ft. office
Storage Yard
Convenience                               P  P  P  P   P           1:250 sq.
Store                                                              ft.
Country Club   S  S   S   S   S   S   S            S           S   1:250 sq.
                                                                   ft.
Dance, Music,
or Drama       P                          P  P  P  P   P           1:4 pupils
Studio
Donation or
Recycling                                 P  P  P  P   P   P       N/A
Collection
Point
Drive-Thru or
Drive-In Uses
other than
Restaurant or                             S  P  P  S   P           Per use
Cafeteria,
with Drive-
Thru
Electrical
Energy         S                                           S       N/A
Generating
Plant
Electrical
Power          P  P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P   P   P   N/A
Substations
Electrical     P  P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P   P   P   N/A
Transmission
Equestrian     P              S                                    1:400 sq.
Center                                                             ft. office
Equipment                                       S      P   P       1:400 sq.
Rental (Heavy)                                                     ft. office
Equipment                                    S  S      P   P       1:400 sq.
Repair Shop                                                        ft.
Exterminator                                    P-     P-  P-      1:400 sq.
                                                19     19  1 9     ft. office
Fabrication,                                                       1:1,000 sq.
Metal or                                               P   P       ft. or 1:
Plastic                                                            3 employees
Farmer's       S                          S  S  S  S   S           By SUP
Market
Feed Store     S                                P      P           1:400 sq.
                                                                   ft.
Flea Market    S                                S      S           By permit
Florist                                   P  P  P  P   P           1:400 sq.
                                                                   ft.
Food                                                               1:1,000 sq.
Processing                                             S   P       ft. or 1:
Plant                                                              3 employees
Fraternal                                 P  P  P  P   P           1:400 sq.
Organization                                                       ft.
Funeral Home                              S  S  S  S   S   S       1:3 seats
or Mortuary
Furniture
Repair and     S                          S  S  P      P           1:400 sq.
Upholstering                                                       ft.
Shop
Gasoline or
Diesel
Passenger                                 S- P- P- S-  P-          1:250 sq.
Vehicle                                   10 10 10 10  10          ft. indoors
Filling or
Service
Station
Gasoline or
Diesel Truck                                    S-     P-  P-      1:250 sq.
Filling or                                      10     10  1 0     ft. indoors
Service
Station
Gasoline or
Diesel Truck
Filling or                                             S-  P-      1:250 sq.
Service                                                10  1 0     ft. indoors
Station with
Overnight
Parking
Gasoline or
Diesel
Passenger                                              S   P       N/A
Vehicle Self-
Service Pumps
Only
Golf Course    S  S   S   S   S   S   S   S  S  S  S           S   5:hole
Greenhouse                                                         1:1,000 sq.
(Commercial    P                                P      P   P       ft.
Non-Hobby)
Grocery Store
(less than                                P  P  P  P   P           1:250 sq.
20,000 square                                                      ft.
feet)
Grocery Store
(equal to or                                                       1:250 sq.
greater than                                 P  P  P               ft.
20,000 square
feet)
Gun Club,
Skeet or       P                             P  P      P           1:lane
Target Range
(Indoor)
Gun Club,
Skeet or       S                                       S           1:400 sq.
Target Range                                                       ft. indoors
(Outdoor)
Gym or Health/                            P  P  P  P               1:400 sq.
Fitness Center                                                     ft.
Gymnastic                                 P  P  P  P   P           1:400 sq.
Studio                                                             ft.
Halfway House  S                                S      S           1:
                                                                   2 employees
Handicraft     P                          P  P  P  P   P           1:400 sq.
Shop                                                               ft.
Hazardous
Waste Disposal                                                     1:1,000 sq.
(see                                                       S       ft.
subsection
3.06)
Heavy Load                                      P-                 1:400 sq.
Vehicle Sales                                   6      P-6         ft. indoors
and Service
Heavy Load                                                         1:1,000 sq.
Vehicle                                                S-6 P-6     ft.
Service Garage
Heliport or    P                                S-     S-  S-      N/A
Helistop                                        12     12  1 2
Hobby Shop                                P  P  P  P   P           1:400 sq.
                                                                   ft.
Home-Based        P-  P-  P-  P-  P-  P-           P-          P-  N/A
Business          13  13  13  13  13  13           13          15
Hospital,                                 S  P  P  P   P           2:exam room
Acute Care
Hospital,                                    P  P  P   P           3:bed
Chronic Care
Hotel                                     S- S- P- P-              1:400 sq.
                                          14 14 14 14              ft.
Hotel,                                       S- S- S-              1:room + 5
Extended Stay                                15 15 15
Institution
for the Care
of Alcoholic,                                   P      P   P       3:bed
Psychiatric or
Narcotic
Patients
Jewelry                                                            1:400 sq.
Manufacturing                                          P   P       ft.
or Assembly
Landfill                                                   S       N/A
Laundry,                                               P   P       1:1000 sq.
Commercial                                                         ft.
Laundry, Dry                                                       1:400 sq.
Cleaning Drop-                            P  P  P  P   P           ft.
Off/Pick-Up
Laundry, Self-                            P  P  P      P           1:400 sq.
Service                                                            ft.
Leather
Product and    P                                       P   P       1:1,000 sq.
Saddle                                                             ft.
Manufacturing
Library                                   P  P  P  P   P           1:250 sq.
                                                                   ft.
Light Assembly
and                                                    P   P       1:1,000 sq.
Manufacturing                                                      ft.
Processes
Manufacturing                                                      1:1,000 sq.
or Industrial                                          P   P       ft.
Operations
Meat                                                               1:1,000 sq.
Processing                                                 S       ft.
Plant
Medical Clinic                            P  P  P  P   P           1:400 sq.
                                                                   ft.
Movie Theatre                                S  P  S               1:4 seats
Movie Theatre, S                                S  S   S           N/A
Drive In
Newspaper                                              P   P       1:1000 sq.
Printing                                                           ft.
Non-Profit        S   S   S   S   S   S   S  P  P  S   P   P   S   1:400 sq.
Services                                                           ft.
Nursery, Non-  P                                S      P           1:400 sq.
Retail                                                             ft. indoors
Nursery,       S                                P      P           1:400 sq.
Retail                                                             ft.
Office,
Professional,                             P  P  P  P   P           1:400 sq.
Medical, or                                                        ft.
Business
Outside                                      P- P- P-  P-          N/A
Display                                      18 18 18  18
                                                                   1:400 sq.
Outside Sales                                S  S      S           ft. indoors
                                                                   or 2:
                                                                   employee
Outside                                      S- S-     S-  P-      N/A
Storage                                      19 19     19  1 9
Park,
Playground, or P  P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P   P   P   N/A
Community
Center, Public
Parking Garage                        P      P  P  P   P   P       N/A
Parking (Heavy                                         S-6 S-6     N/A
Load Vehicles)
Parking        S-                         P- P- P-
(Principal     6  S-6 S-6 S-6 S-6 S-6 S-6 6  6  6  S-6 P-6 P-6 S-6 N/A
Use)
Pawn Shop                                    P  P      P           1:400 sq.
                                                                   ft.
Penal and
Correctional   S                                       S   S       N/A
Institutions
Personal                                  P  P  P  P   P           1:400 sq.
Service Shop                                                       ft.
Pet Store                                    P  P  P               1:400 sq.
                                                                   ft.
Petroleum and
Gas Storage                                                S       N/A
and Collection
Facilities
Pharmacy                                  P  P  P  P   P           1:400 sq.
                                                                   ft.
Photographer's
or Artist's    P                          P  P  P  P   P           1:1,000 sq.
Studio/Film                                                        ft.
Processing
Plastic                                                            1:1,000 sq.
Products                                                   S       ft.
Manufacturing
Play Field or
Stadium (no    P  S   S   S   S   P   P   P  P  P  P   P   P   S   1:4 seats
nighttime
illumination)
Play Field or
Stadium (with                                S  S  S   S           1:4 seats
nighttime
illumination)
Plumbing/
Electrical/Air                                                     1:400 sq.
Conditioning                                 P  P      P           ft.
Store (Retail
Sales Only)
Police or Fire P  P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P   P   P   N/A
Station
Printing/
Duplication                                  P  P  P   P           1:400 sq.
Shop or                                                            ft.
Mailing Center
Private Club                                 S  S  S   S           1:250 sq.
                                                                   ft.
Professional   P                          P  P  P  P   P   P       1:400 sq.
Services                                                           ft.
Public Use or
Building -     P  P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P   P   P   By use
Municipal
Radio or TV                                                        1:400 sq.
Station (no                               S  P  P  P   P   P       ft.
tower)
Rail Station
or Bus                                    S  P  P  P   P   S       1:400 sq.
Station,                                                           ft.
Passenger
Railroad                                               S   P       1:400 sq.
Facility                                                           ft.
Railway and
Railway Right- P  P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P   P   P   N/A
of-Way
Recycling                                              S-  S-      1:400 sq.
Center                                                 20  2 0     ft.
Recycling                                                  S-      1:400 sq.
Facility                                                   2 0     ft.
Religious Use  P  P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P   P   P   1:4 seats
Research or                                                        1:400 sq.
Scientific                                      P  S   P   S       ft.
Laboratory
Resource
Extraction     P  P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P   P   P   N/A
(Oil and Gas)
Restaurant or
Cafeteria,                                   P  P  S               1:200 sq.
with Drive-                                                        ft.
Thru
Restaurant or
Cafeteria,                                P  P  P  P               1:200 sq.
without Drive-                                                     ft.
Thru
Retail Stores                             P  P  P  P               1:400 sq.
and Shops                                                          ft.
RV Park                                                S-  S-      1:bay
                                                       22  2 2
School, Career                            P  P  P  P   P   P       1:3 seats
School,
College or                                S  S  S  S   S           Per SUP
University
                                                                   1:classroom
School, K-12      P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P       P   (K-8)
                                                                   2.5:class-
                                                                   room (9-12)
Seamstress or                                P  P  P   P           1:400 sq.
Tailor Shop                                                        ft.
Secondhand                                P  P  P  P   P           1:400 sq.
Store                                                              ft.
Self-Storage
(Mini                                           S  S   S   P       1:400 sq.
Warehouse                                                          ft. Office
Facilities)
Sexually                                                           1:250 sq.
Oriented                                                   S       ft.
Business
Shoe Repair                               P  P  P  P   P           1:400 sq.
Shop                                                               ft.
Slaughterhouse                                             S       1:1,000 sq.
                                                                   ft.
Small Engine                              P  P  P      P           1:400 sq.
Repair Shop                                                        ft.
Smelter,                                                           1:
Refinery, or                                               S       3 employees
Chemical Plant
Solar Panel or
Array (mounted P- P-  P-  P-  P-  P-  P-  P- P- P- P-  P-  P-  P-  N/A
on building or 21 21  21  21  21  21  21  21 21 21 21  21  21  23
structure)
Solar Panel or P-                               P-     P-  P-
Array (ground  21                               21     21  21      N/A
installation)
Stable
(Commercial or S                                                   N/A
Boarding)
Stable         P                                                   N/A
(Private)
Sundry Store                                 P- P- P-  P-          1:250 sq.
                                             23 23 23  23          ft.
Swimming Pool  P  P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P       P   N/A
Tattoo or                                    S- S- S-  S-
Piercing                                     24 24 24  24          1.5:seat
Studio
Taxi Garage or                                  P      P           1:400 sq.
Dispatch                                                           ft. office
Taxidermist    P                             P  P      P           1:1,000 sq.
                                                                   ft.
Temporary
Building for   S  S   S   S   S   S   S   S  S  S  S   S   S   S   By permit
New
Construction
Temporary On-
Site Storage   P- P-  P-  P-  P-  P-  P-  P- P- P- P-  P-  P-  P-  N/A
Unit or        25 25  25  25  25  25  25  25 25 25 25  25  25  27
Container
Textile                                                S   P       1:1,000 sq.
Manufacturing                                                      ft.
Theater, Live
Performance                               P  P  P  P   P           1:4 seats
(indoor)
Theater, Live
Performance                               S  P  P  P   P           1:4 seats
(outdoor)
Thrift Store                              P  P  P  P   P           1:400 sq.
                                                                   ft.
Tobacco,
Vapor, e-                                       S-     S-          1:250 sq.
Cigarette                                       26     26          ft.
Store
Truck Terminal                                         S   P       1:1,000 sq.
                                                                   ft.
Utility
Distribution/
Transmission   P  P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P   P   P   N/A
Line,
Franchise
Veterinarian
Clinic (no     P                          P  P  P  P   P           1:exam room
outdoor
kennels)
Veterinarian
Clinic (with                                    S      P           1:exam room
outdoor
kennels)
Warehouse/                                             P   P       1:1,000 sq.
Distribution                                                       ft.
Water Storage  S  S   S   S   S   S   S   S  S  S  S   S   S   S   N/A
Water or
Wastewater     S  S   S   S   S   S   S   S  S  S  S   S   S   S   N/A
Treatment
Facility
Wholesale
Center (no                                      P      P   P       1:400 sq.
outside sales                                                      ft.
or storage)
Wind Turbine   P- P-  P-  P-  P-  P-  P-  P- P- P- P-  P-  P-  P-  N/A
               21 21  21  21  21  21  21  21 21 21 21  21  2 1 23
Wireless       S- S-  S-  S-  S-  S-  S-  S- S- S- S-  S-  S-  S-
Communication  27 27  27  27  27  27  27  27 27 27 27  27  2 7 29  N/A
System
Woodworking                                                        1:1,000 sq.
and Planing                                            P   P       ft.
Mill
 
   3.04.   Conditional Development Standards.
      A.   Purpose statement. Subsection 3.04 is intended to establish
development criteria for use types in addition to those outlined in Section
155.4 Site Development Requirements.
      B.   The following conditional development standards shall apply to the
uses specified in each subsection:
         1.   Agricultural use standards for select zoning districts. Approval
is subject to the following conditions:
            a.   Farming, stable, or nursery, on a tract of five acres or more;
            b.   Retail sales conducted from the premises in connection with
farming, stable, or nursery uses are only permitted as secondary uses, and
require approval of a specific use permit (SUP).
         2.   Alcoholic beverage sales and service (on-site consumption)
standards. Approval is subject to the following conditions:
            a.   The alcoholic beverage sales and service use is operated
within the same premises as a restaurant and the gross receipts from the sale
of alcoholic beverages does not exceed the permitted threshold as established
by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission (TABC) rules and regulations, as
amended.
            b.   Shall only be permissible when the location complies with all
of the distance requisites as required by §
120.04 of the Code of Ordinances.
         3.   Alcohol sales (off-premises consumption) standards. Approval is
subject to the following conditions:
            a.   Shall only be permissible when the alcohol sales (off-premises
consumption) is not within 300 feet of any religious use, school, K-12, or
public hospital, chronic care.
            b.   The measurement of the distance between the alcohol sales
(off-premises consumption) and any religious use, school, K-12, or public
hospital, chronic care must conform to the TABC definition.
         4.   Alternative financial establishment standards. Approval is
subject to the following conditions:
            a.   Shall only be permissible where the place of business
containing the alternative financial establishment is not within 1,000 feet of
any lot containing another financial establishment as measured from property
line to property line;
            b.   Shall not be located within 300 feet from a lot in a
residential district, measured from property line to property line;
            c.   Shall only operate within a freestanding building and may not
operate in the same structure as any other use;
            d.   Shall also include vehicle storage area excluding required
off-street parking for vehicles stored or held for collateral from alternative
financial establishment transaction.
         5.   Amusement, commercial (outdoors) standards.
            a.   A specific use permit (SUP) may be required according to the
Permitted Use Chart.
            b.   Approval is subject to the following conditions:
               (1)   All exterior light sources shall be of a down-light type,
indirect, diffused, or shielded type luminaries and so installed as to reduce
glare effect and consequent interference with use of adjacent properties and
boundary streets.
               (2)   No intermittent or flashing lights shall be permitted that
are visible beyond the property line of the amusement, commercial (outdoors).
               (3)   Luminaries shall be mounted at a height not to exceed 30
feet as measured vertically from the horizontal surface of the nearest parking
pavement.
               (4)   Exterior auditory devices shall not exceed 45 decibels at
the property line.
               (5)   Shall not be located within 200 feet of a property zoned
SF or developed with dwelling, single-family (detached) uses.
         6.   Automobile or other motorized vehicle sales and service.
            a.   Purpose and applicability.
               (1)   The purpose of this subsection is to provide consistent
standards for uses that primarily involve and are oriented toward the sale,
resale, service, repair, rebuilding, or salvage of automobiles.
               (2)   This subsection applies to the following uses: automobile
body shop; automobile or other motorized vehicle sales and service; automobile
rental; automobile salvage; automobile service garage (major); automobile
service garage (minor); car wash, full service; car wash, self service; parking
(principal use); parking (heavy load vehicles); automobile wrecker and impound
lot.
            b.   A specific use permit (SUP) may be required according to the
Permitted Use Chart.
            c.   Lighting and noise.
               (1)   All exterior light sources shall be of a down-light type,
indirect, diffused, or shielded type luminaries and so installed as to reduce
glare effect and consequent interference with use of adjacent properties and
boundary streets.
               (2)   No intermittent or flashing lights shall be permitted.
               (3)   Luminaries shall be mounted at a height not to exceed 30
feet as measured vertically from the horizontal surface of the nearest parking
pavement.
               (4)   No exterior auditory devices shall be permitted.
            d.   Parking and storage of vehicles.
               (1)   An approved paved surface is required beneath all vehicles
that are offered for sale, are parked, staged, stored, or are in the process of
being serviced, repaired, or washed along with a method of capturing any runoff
of fluids, oils, or wash generated by the use and preventing the runoff from
entering the stormwater or sanitary sewer system.
               (2)   Existing unpaved or gravel surfaces that have been
utilized for a use listed in subsection a(2) above may continue but are
considered non-conforming under subsection 3.07.F Nonconforming Regarding
Parking or Landscaping.
               (3)   No vehicle may be parked or stored within a public right-
of-way.
               (4)   Storage of vehicle parts, including wheels and tires, is
allowed only within an enclosed building.
               (5)   Parking of vehicles must allow for emergency access to the
building and to the vehicles themselves in case of fire or other emergency
according to minimum adopted standards and is subject to approval by the Fire
Marshal.
               (6)   Vehicles may not be parked outside between the front face
of a building and the public street when inoperable due to being mechanically
disabled and missing one or more of the following components: bumper, door,
hood, window glass, headlight or taillight housings, or wheels or tires.
                  (a)   For the purposes of this subsection 3.04.B.6, DISABLED
means that the vehicle cannot safely or legally operate or move under its own
power on a public street.
                  (b)   This subsection does not apply to a vehicle that is
actively undergoing repair or replacement of tires or bulbs.
            e.   Movement of vehicles to and from a location. No disabled
vehicle that is brought to or taken from a site listed under this subsection
may be left in the public right-of-way or loaded or unloaded within the public
right-of-way.
            f.   Repair of vehicles.
               (1)   Repair or servicing of vehicles is allowed only within a
building that is fully enclosed.
               (2)   Tire changes and minor changing of parts such as
windshield wipers or light bulbs are exempt from this restriction.
         7.   Banquet hall standards.
            a.   A specific use permit (SUP) may be required according to the
Permitted Use Chart.
            b.   The banquet hall must have frontage on and access to an
arterial or major collector thoroughfare as shown on the MTP.
         8.   Brewpub or brewery or distillery standards. Approval is subject
to the following conditions:
            a.   A brewpub or brewery or distillery shall only be permissible
when the location complies with all of the distance requisites as required by §
120.04 of the Code of Ordinances.
            b.   A specific use permit is required in the following
circumstances:
               (1)   The physical size of all operations within a single
building exceeds 20,000 square feet;
               (2)   Live outdoor entertainment, a banquet hall or other
entertainment venue operate as an integral business with the microbrewery or
microdistillery. INTEGRAL BUSINESS means any of the following: sharing of
demised spaces, common areas, or having access to each other from an area other
than a public street or alley.
               (3)   On-site production exceeds 10,000 barrels per year.
         9.   Concrete or asphalt batching plant, temporary. The Director of
Public Works shall approve a permit for a temporary asphalt or concrete batch
plant to provide construction materials for the site on which the temporary
batch plant is located during the construction phase of a permanent building,
new residential subdivision or other project as authorized under this code of
ordinances, provided such Temporary Concrete or Asphalt Batching Plan complies
with the following requirements:
            a.   The temporary batch plant shall receive an approved air
quality permit from the State of Texas, and evidence must be presented at the
time of application.
            b.   The temporary batch plant shall follow all State of Texas
stormwater run-off requirements. A copy of any required state documents must be
on the site of the temporary batch plant at all times.
            c.   A location map and site plan, drawn to scale, shall be
provided and indicate the following: the location of the temporary batch plant
and hazardous materials storage on the subject property along with a defined
plant boundary and the location of all related equipment, including but not
limited to the batching equipment and containers, storage areas, hazardous
materials storage, if applicable.
            d.   A site plan, drawn to scale, shall be provided showing a
minimum distance of 300 between the batch plant and protected uses, such as the
closest habitable residences, schools and religious institutions. The distance
shall be measured in a direct line from the boundary of the temporary batch
plant, as indicated on the application, to the property boundary of the
protected use.
            e.   The material delivery route shall be provided, indicating
routes for raw material delivery with details on the type and numbers of trucks
per day. Said route shall require final approval by the City Manager or his or
her designee.
            f.   The hours of operation shall follow the construction hours of
operation as required by the Code of Ordinances.
            g.   A letter of permission shall be provided by the property owner
stating that the temporary batch plant will be used to provide concrete/asphalt
for the same site where it is located and no other project(s). The letter must
also state that the site will be left in pre-approved condition.
            h.   The application must state the amount of time that the
temporary batch plant will be in operation. The permit duration shall not
exceed 60 days from the date of issuance unless the Director of Public Works
grants an extension not to exceed 60 days. Only one permit may be issued for a
given parcel of property within a 12-month period.
            i.   The Director of Public Works shall determine if additional
materials testing is required and may determine the testing personnel required.
Any cost of testing shall be paid by the applicant.
            j.   The batch plant shall not be used as a batching facility for
any other site other than the site on which it is located and no concrete,
asphalt and any raw materials may be sold from said plant.
            k.   The temporary batch plant and all equipment and materials used
in the operation of the plant shall be removed from the property on which the
plant is located within 14 days after completion of the project.
            l.   Any appeal or waiver from the requirements of this subsection
shall require final approval of a specific use permit (SUP) by the City
Council.
         10.   Vehicle filling or service station standards. This subsection
3.04.B.10 applies to gasoline or diesel passenger vehicle filling or service
stations, gasoline or diesel passenger vehicle self-service pumps only,
gasoline or diesel truck filling or service stations, and gasoline or diesel
truck filling or service station with overnight parking.
            a.   Gasoline pumps, pump islands, canopies, or car washes, where
adjacent to property zoned SF and MF-1 shall maintain a minimum setback of at
least 50 feet from any property line shared with property zoned SF or MF-1.
            b.   Pump islands must be located at least 20 feet from any
property line.
            c.   Overnight truck parking areas must be located at least 50 feet
from single-family and the MF-1 zoning districts.
            d.   The outer edge of the canopy must be located at least ten feet
from all public rights-of-way.
         11.   Guest house/in-law quarters standards. See subsection 3.08
Accessory Buildings and Uses for standards.
         12.   Heliport or helistop standards. Approval is subject to the
following conditions:
            a.   No heliport or helistop shall be located within 1,000 feet of
any religious use, school, K-12, public hospital, chronic care, library, park,
playground, or community center, public or within 1,000 feet of any dwelling
unless:
               (1)   Noise attenuation methods are implemented to achieve noise
levels no greater than if the heliport or helistop were located 1,000 feet from
any such property in an unprotected state;
               (2)   The Federal Aviation Administration has approved approach
and departure paths for the proposed heliport or helistop that require all
departures to be made at an angle of more than 90 degrees from any boundary or
any such property which is less than 1,000 feet from the proposed heliport or
helistop; and
               (3)   No substantial adverse impact exists on residences or
businesses within the 1,000 feet requirement.
            b.   A heliport or helistop that is an accessory use to an airport
or airport facility or hospital, chronic care is exempt from this subsection
3.04.B.12.
         13.   Home-based business standards. Approval is subject to the
following conditions:
            a.   Employment of persons by the business owner is limited to
permanent residents of the household;
            b.   The use is operated entirely within the dwelling unit or an
accessory building that is permissible under subsection 3.08;
            c.   The use of the dwelling unit for the home-based business is
clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by the
occupant;
            d.   The dwelling and property have not been altered to accommodate
the home-based business, other than alterations customary to a dwelling or
residential property and that are allowed under this Zoning Ordinance;
            e.   No sign advertising a home-based business shall be placed on
property where a home-based business is conducted;
            f.   Merchandise shall not be offered or displayed for sale on the
premises and no sale may be conducted at the dwelling without prior arrangement
or appointment. Sales incidental to a service and orders previously made by
electronic means or by mail order are permissible;
            g.   Traffic generated by the home-based business shall not exceed
volumes that are normally expected in a residential neighborhood. Visitors to
the home-based business must park legally on the street or in a residential
driveway;
            h.   Vehicles, including trucks and trailers, used by the business
must be legally parked when not in use and not exceed 16,000 pounds gross
vehicle weight rating or have more than two axles;
            i.   Vehicles conducting commercial deliveries to the home-based
business are limited to those having two axles;
            j.   No equipment, process, or work shall be used or conducted in
such home-based business that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or
electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the
case of electrical interference, no equipment, process or work shall be used or
conducted which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or
television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage
off the premises;
            k.   No outside storage or outside display of any type shall be
permitted with any home-based business.
         14.   Hotel standards. Approval is subject to the following
conditions:
            a.   Staff shall be provided on-site 24 hours a day.
            b.   All room doors, stairwells, and access corridors shall be
located within the exterior walls.
            c.   At least five amenities shall be provided from the list below:
               (1)   Entrance lobby with at least 1,500 square feet of floor
area;
               (2)   Indoor/outdoor pool of at least 800 square feet of surface
area;
               (3)   Spa/sauna;
               (4)   Weight room/fitness center;
               (5)   Playground;
               (6)   Plaza/atrium;
               (7)   Rooftop deck;
               (8)   Game room;
               (9)   Full-service restaurant (minimum seating capacity of 35);
               (10)   A minimum of 100 guest room units;
               (11)   A meeting/conference room (1,000 square feet minimum);
               (12)   Linen service;
               (13)   Room service;
               (14)   Convenience/sundry shop;
               (15)   Bistro or café.
         15.   Hotel, extended stay standards.
            a.   A specific use permit (SUP) may be required according to the
Permitted Use Chart.
            b.   Approval is subject to the following conditions:
               (1)   Shall provide staff on-site 24 hours a day;
               (2)   All room doors, stairwells, and access corridors shall be
located within the exterior walls;
               (3)   Shall provide at least six amenities from the list below:
                  (a)   Entrance lobby with at least 1,500 square feet of floor
area;
                  (b)   Indoor/outdoor pool of at least 800 square feet of
surface area;
                  (c)   Spa/sauna;
                  (d)   Weight room/fitness center;
                  (e)   Playground;
                  (f)   Plaza/atrium;
                  (g)   Game room;
                  (h)   Jogging trail;
                  (i)   Conference room (1,000 square feet minimum);
                  (j)   Full-service restaurant (minimum seating capacity of
35);
                  (k)   Rooftop deck;
                  (l)   Outdoor living or lounge area with two or more
recreational amenities such as games, firepits, barbeque grills, picnic tables,
or sports courts;
                  (m)   A kitchen facility within a minimum of 50% of the room
units.
               (4)   Shall have a setback of a minimum of 100 feet from the
boundary of any residential district.
               (5)   Hotel, extended stay must provide a minimum of 75 guest
room units.
         16.   Industrialized housing standards. Industrialized housing is
permitted in the same districts as a site-built dwelling as shown in the Use
Chart subject to the following conditions:
            a.   Dwellings constructed as industrialized housing must meet or
exceed all building code requirements that apply to other dwelling units
concerning on-site construction;
            b.   The dwelling must conform to all applicable zoning standards
for the respective zoning district;
            c.   The dwelling must be constructed on an approved platted lot;
and
            d.   The dwelling must be securely affixed to a permanent
foundation.
         17.   Mobile home parks, trailer parks, trailer courts, or trailer
subdivisions standards.
            a.   Shall require approval of a specific use permit (SUP), as
identified in the Use Table.
            b.   The minimum site area shall be ten acres.
            c.   The development shall have direct access to a collector or
arterial street, as identified in the city's adopted Thoroughfare Plan.
         18.   Outside display standards. Approval is subject to the following
conditions:
            a.   Areas shall not be placed or located more than 30 feet from
the main building and shall not exceed 50% of the linear frontage of the
building;
            b.   Areas are permitted year-round but items must be rotated so
that no item is left on display for longer than 30 consecutive days or suffers
decay or damage from weather or sun exposure;
            c.   Areas shall not occupy any of the parking spaces that are
required by this Zoning Ordinance for the principal use(s) of the property,
except on a temporary basis only, which is a maximum of 45 days per display and
a maximum of two displays per calendar year;
            d.   Areas shall not pose a safety or visibility hazard, nor impede
public vehicular or pedestrian circulation, either on-site or off-site, in any
way;
            e.   Areas shall not extend into public right-of-way or onto
adjacent property;
            f.   Items must be displayed in a neat, orderly manner, and the
display area must be maintained in a clean, litter-free manner; and
            g.   Outside display is permitted only as an accessory use and is
not a permitted principal use, unless otherwise provided within this Zoning
Ordinance.
         19.   Outside storage standards. Approval is subject to the following
conditions:
            a.   Outside storage is prohibited in the required front yard or
between a primary building and a public or private street.
            b.   Screening shall consist of a minimum six foot opaque screen
surrounding the outside storage at the property line or street right-of-way
abutting the area to be screened by one or a combination of the following
methods:
               (1)   Opaque wall consisting of brick, stone, or painted CMU
block with a split-faced finish;
               (2)   Wrought iron or tubular steel combined with evergreen
trees planted a minimum of ten feet on center and growing to a mature height of
at least six feet;
               (3)   Wood or wood vinyl combined with evergreen trees planted a
minimum of ten feet on center and growing to a mature height of at least six
feet; or
               (4)   An equivalent alternative screening method approved by the
Zoning Ordinance.
               (5)   No outside storage may exceed the height of the screening
device unless set back two feet for each one foot the stored items or materials
exceed the height of the screening device or the stored items or materials are
effectively screened by evergreen vegetation that forms a solid screen.
               (6)   The standards of this subsection 3.04.B.19 do not apply to
a nursery, non-retail if the principal use of the storage area is the storage
of plants. Other objects such as pallets and bags or piles of material such as
mulch must be screened in accordance with this subsection 3.04.B.19.
         20.   Recycling center and recycling facility standards. Approval is
subject to the following conditions:
            a.   The recycling center or recycling facility is only permissible
where the place of business containing the recycling facility is not within
1,000 feet of any Single-Family Districts or MF District as measured from
property line to property line of the recycling facility.
            b.   The recycling center or recycling facility must include a
separate parking area for loading and unloading of materials.
         21.   Renewable energy system standards.
            a.   Solar panel or array.
               (1)   Building or structure mounted. A solar panel or array
mounted on a building or structure is subject to the following:
                  (a)   A solar panel or array shall not exceed the overall
height of the building or structure to which it is mounted.
                  (b)   A solar panel or array shall meet all wind load and
structural requirements of the current adopted Building Code.
               (2)   Ground installation. A solar panel or array installed on
the ground is subject to the following:
                  (a)   The solar panel or array shall not exceed the maximum
height for an accessory building or structure in the same zoning district (see
subsection 3.08. Accessory Buildings and Uses).
                  (b)   The solar panel or array is subject to lot coverage
limitations for the underlying zoning district (see subsection 2.05.
Dimensional Standards Table).
            b.   Wind turbine.
               (1)   In addition to an approved site plan, wind turbine must
comply with the following conditions. The special and unique nature of wind
turbine generators, as a result of their movement, size and noise, means that
the City Council may deny an application for a wind turbine generator that
meets the technical requirements set forth below if the wind turbine generator
is proposed to be located in an area which will unreasonably encroach upon the
rights of landowners in the area. The application for a specific use permit for
a wind turbine shall include the following:
                  (a)   Detailed construction plans, with elevation drawings to
scale, showing the proposed location and specification of the wind turbine.
Drawings shall show all structures, existing and proposed, on the tract of
land, together with all structures on neighboring tracts within 1,500 feet of
the proposed tower location.
                  (b)   A written statement from the applicant's engineer as to
the engineering standards to be observed in the construction and operation of
the wind turbine. This will include copies of all manufacturer's statements and
warranties with respect to the proposed wind turbine and the engineer's
analysis of the proposed wind turbine's safety and performance with respect to
extreme weather conditions in the North Texas area, such as ice storms, high
winds, and lightning.
                  (c)   Plans and specifications for any necessary related
equipment, buildings, wiring or other construction necessary and ancillary to
the proposed wind turbine. All lines, electrical and otherwise, between the
turbine, the equipment buildings, the structures on the site, or that are
otherwise required, shall be buried below ground.
                  (d)   The location of the proposed underground lines shall be
shown on the application drawings.
                  (e)   The application shall include the written consent of
the property owners within 600 feet of the proposed wind turbine's installation
site, or the applicant must obtain a waiver of such written consent from the
City Council.
                  (f)   The applicant shall pay all legal, engineering, and
building inspection fees incurred in the review and construction of the wind
turbine.
               (2)   A wind turbine shall meet the following requirements:
                  (a)   The wind turbine shall have a mast or monopole design
with no guy wires and shall not be more than 50 feet high measured from the
existing ground level to the highest point of the rotor blades.
                  (b)   The wind turbine shall be located on a tract containing
a minimum size of five acres. One wind turbine is allowed per five acres.
                  (c)   The wind turbine shall be set back from the property
line or right-of-way a distance at least equal to the height of the turbine
plus 15 feet, or double the height of the turbine if the property abuts
residential property.
                  (d)   The maximum noise level created by the turbine shall
not exceed 40 decibels measured at the property line adjacent to any
residentially zoned property, and 60 decibels at the property line adjacent to
any other zoning district, as measured on the dB(A) scale, at any wind
velocity.
                  (e)   The wind turbine shall not have lights, reflective
features, or paint that is not expressly required by FAA regulations for
warning to air traffic. That which is required, if any, shall meet the minimum
FAA requirements only. Subject to FAA regulations, strobe lights, reflective
paint, and warning paint schemes, such as red and white stripes, are
prohibited. Subject to receiving a city permit for another color, all wind
turbine masts and rotors shall be dull gray or dull green in color. No signage
or advertisement shall be allowed on the wind turbine or tower.
                  (f)   The wind turbine must have either:
                     (i)   A locked, anti-climb device installed; or
                     (ii)   Be completely enclosed by a locked protective fence
at least six feet in height.
                  (g)   The wind turbine shall be in compliance with all state
and federal laws, including the regulations of the Public Utility Commission,
Federal Aviation Administration, and the Federal Communications Commission.
                  (h)   The wind turbine shall comply with those additional
requirements as may be required by the City Council as necessary to preserve
and protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.
               (3)   Special exceptions. The City Council may grant special
exceptions to the requirements of this subsection if the applicant demonstrates
that due to unique conditions or qualities of the land or surrounding
properties or equipment to be installed, the application of the requirements of
this subsection are not feasible or practical and create an unreasonable
hardship.
         22.   RV park standards.
            a.   A specific use permit (SUP) may be required according to the
Permitted Use Chart.
            b.   Approval is subject to the following conditions:
               (1)   No property shall be used as an RV park unless it is a
minimum of two acres in area.
               (2)   Driveways and parking pads for RVs must be paved with an
improved surface.
               (3)   Each parking pad must include an electrical hookup.
               (4)   The maximum length of occupancy in the RV park is 30 days.
         23.   Sundry store standards. The property line of a sundry store
shall not be located within 1,000 feet of the property line of another sundry
store.
         24.   Tattoo or piercing studio.
            a.   A specific use permit (SUP) may be required according to the
Permitted Use Chart
            b.   Approval is subject to the following conditions:
               (1)   A studio shall operate only with a valid license issued by
the Texas Department of State Health Services and subject to inspection by the
State Department or its affiliates or assigns, including the city.
               (2)   A studio shall not locate within 300 feet of a church,
school, residential zoning district, or another studio, as measured along the
property lines of street front and from property line to property line.
               (3)   Hours of operation shall not extend beyond midnight, and
shall not start before 6:00 a.m.
         25.   Temporary on-site storage unit or container standards. Approval
is subject to the following conditions:
            a.   Temporary on-site storage unit or container used for moving.
            b.   The owner of the property on which the temporary on-site
storage unit or container is to be placed shall obtain a permit before placing
the temporary on-site storage unit or container on the property.
               (1)   The general location of the temporary on-site storage unit
or container shall be shown on the permit or supporting documents.
               (2)   The temporary on-site storage unit or container shall be
placed on the driveway at the farthest point from the street. Temporary on-site
storage unit or containers are prohibited upon any public right-of-way or
unpaved surface within the property such as a yard.
               (3)   On a lot or property zoned SF or MF-1, use of temporary
on-site storage unit or container(s) are subject to the following restrictions:
                  (a)   No property shall have more than two temporary on-site
storage unit or containers at the same time; and
                  (b)   No more than two times within a calendar year; and
                  (c)   No more than ten consecutive days.
            c.   Temporary on-site storage unit or container used for
remodeling. The owner of the property on which the temporary on-site storage
unit or container is to be placed shall obtain a permit with any building
permit required for the remodeling before placing the temporary on-site storage
unit or container on the property.
               (1)   The general location of the temporary on-site storage unit
or container shall be shown on the permit or supporting documents.
               (2)   The temporary on-site storage unit or container must be
removed within seven days of the final inspection of the work associated with
the temporary on-site storage unit or container or 150 days after the permit is
issued, whichever is soonest.
               (3)   The general location of the temporary on-site storage unit
or container shall be shown on the permit or supporting documents.
               (4)   The temporary on-site storage unit or container shall be
placed on the driveway at the farthest point from the street.
               (5)   Temporary on-site storage unit or containers are
prohibited upon any public right-of-way or unpaved surface within the property
such as a yard.
         26.   Tobacco, vapor, e-cigarette store standards.
            a.   A specific use permit (SUP) may be required according to the
Permitted Use Chart
            b.   Approval is subject to the following condition: The
establishment shall not be within 1,000 feet of a church, public or private
school or day care, or hospital.
               (1)   When measuring between the establishment and a church,
public or private school or day care, the distance will be measured from the
nearest property lines.
               (2)   When measuring between the establishment and a hospital,
the distance will be measured from the nearest doorways by which the public may
enter the places of business, along street lines and in direct lines across
intersections.
         27.   Wireless communications facilities standards.
            a.   Purpose. Wireless telecommunication facilities used in
transmitting and receiving signal energy are essential and promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The purpose of this
subsection is to govern the placement of these facilities to:
               (1)   Regulate wireless telecommunications as an essential
utility necessary to maintain the economy and quality of life in Cleburne;
               (2)   Promote the aesthetic quality of the city as a significant
aspect of the health, safety, and general welfare of the community and minimize
impacts and potential impacts of wireless communications facilities with
respect to community aesthetics;
               (3)   Encourage operators of antenna facilities and antennas to
locate facilities in areas where the adverse impact on the community is
minimal;
               (4)   Encourage co-location on both new and existing antenna
facilities;
               (5)   Encourage operators of antenna facilities and antennas to
configure facilities in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact through
careful design, landscape screening, and innovative stealth techniques;
               (6)   Enhance the ability of antenna facilities and antennas to
provide services to the community effectively and efficiently.
            b.   Standards and applicability. The following regulations apply
to all antenna facilities, including towers, and antennas located within any
district:
               (1)   Accessory building.
                  (a)   An accessory building associated with a facility or an
antenna must be screened and landscaped in accordance with this subsection and
maintained according to subsection 4.01.
                  (b)   If the building is accessory to an antenna attached to
an existing building, the accessory building must be finished in materials that
are consistent with the existing building to which the antenna is attached.
               (2)   Driveway surfaces. All driveways accessing any facility
site or equipment enclosure must be paved with asphalt or concrete pavement
meeting the same specifications as a commercial driveway.
               (3)   Screening and landscaping. Yards or enclosures
incorporating ground-mounted equipment associated with an antenna support
structure such as a tower must be screened from view of public right-of-way and
abutting property by one or both of the following methods:
                  (a)   A masonry wall a minimum of six feet in height
constructed of brick, stone, cement fiber panel, or CMU; or
                  (b)   Painted or rustproof wrought iron or tubular steel
surrounded by a row of evergreens planted a maximum of ten feet on center and
growing to a minimum height of six feet at maturity.
               (4)   Lights. No outdoor lighting is allowed on antennas located
with property zoned residential with the exception of official lighting
required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC).
               (5)   Construction standards.
                  (a)   Before an applicant begins construction of a tower,
antenna support structure, antenna installation, or mast, the Building Official
must review and issue a permit for the installation.
                  (b)   The tower, antenna support structure, antenna
installation, or mast must be installed according to the manufacturer's
recommendations or under the seal of an engineer licensed in the State of Texas
to approve construction plans for wireless facilities.
               (6)   Limitation on structure type.
                  (a)   The Building Official may permit a new antenna support
structure as a stealth facility or a self-supported monopole.
                  (b)   Existing permitted antenna support structures that are
not stealth or monopole, including lattice and guyed towers, may be maintained
and continue in use but shall not be relocated or increased in height and are
considered nonconforming structures (see subsection 3.07).
               (7)   Antenna capacity. An antenna support structure or facility
is limited to the number and size of antennas allowed under any of the
following:
                  (a)   The antenna facility manufacturer's designs and
specifications for maximum wind load requirements;
                  (b)   Specifications approved by an engineer licensed in the
State of Texas to approve construction plans for wireless facilities; or
                  (c)   Applicable regulations adopted by the city under the
International Building Code.
               (8)   Prohibition on construction in easements. No antenna
support facility may be placed within an existing easement except in accordance
with adopted City Code.
               (9)   Abandoned or damaged wireless facility.
                  (a)   The Building Official is authorized to issue notice
ordering the repair or removal of an antenna, antenna support structure
including a tower, or accessory building that is damaged, abandoned, or not in
use for a period of 30 consecutive days.
                  (b)   The owner of the antenna, antenna support structure, or
accessory facility must remove the facility within 30 calendar days following
notice by the Building Official.
                  (c)   The Building Official is further authorized to
immediately remove any antenna, antenna support structure, or accessory
building that constitutes a threat to public safety or health due to damage,
disrepair, or neglect.
               (10)   Construction on platted lot.
                  (a)   The Building Official may only issue a permit for
construction of an antenna support structure or accessory building on a platted
lot.
                  (b)   No part of an antenna, antenna support structure, or
other accessory building may extend beyond the property lines of the lot on
which the facility is located.
            c.   Facility types and location.
               (1)   Amateur radio and TV antennas. Amateur radio and TV
antennas are permitted as an accessory use in any zoning district. In
compliance with the following regulations:
                  (a)   Permitted antenna support structures. An amateur radio
or TV antenna may be attached to a building, monopole tower, or lattice tower.
                  (b)   Antenna height.
                     (i)   Monopole or lattice tower height. The maximum height
of an antenna or antenna support structure is 35 feet unless the Board of
Adjustment approves a special exception to allow a greater height (see
subsection 6.03).
                     (ii)   Attached antenna height. The maximum height of an
antenna mounted to a building is eight feet above the highest point of the
building to which the antenna is attached.
                  (c)   Setbacks. The following minimum setbacks apply to
amateur radio and TV antennas and antenna support structures:
                     (i)   Antennas and antenna facilities are prohibited in
the front and side yard.
                     (ii)   Guy wires are prohibited in front yards but
permitted in the side and rear yard.
                     (iii)   Setbacks for antennas and antenna support
structures are the same as setbacks required for accessory buildings in the
same district.
                  (d)   Separation. There is no minimum or maximum separation
requirement for antennas or antenna support structures from other structures on
the same lot.
                  (e)   Lighting.
                     (i)   Luminaires that rise higher than 20 feet from the
ground are prohibited on antennas or antenna support structures located in or
abutting a property developed as residential or mixed-use.
                     (ii)   Lighting must comply with subsection 4.04, except
lights or lighting that is required by the Federal Aviation Administration or
the Federal Communications Commission.
               (2)   Satellite receive-only antenna.
                  (a)   Size limits in residential and nonresidential
districts. A satellite receive-only antenna is permitted as an accessory use in
any zoning district under the following conditions:
                     (i)   A satellite receive-only antenna is not permitted in
the front yard of any property.
                     (ii)   A satellite receive-only antenna shall not exceed
one meter in diameter on a property zoned SF-6, SF-7, SF-10, or SF-20.
                     (iii)   A satellite receive-only antenna shall not exceed
two meters in diameter in all other zoning districts.
                  (b)   Limitation on number of antennas. Each lot property is
limited to one freestanding satellite receive-only antenna and two roof-mounted
receive-only antennae.
                  (c)   Maximum height. The maximum height of a satellite
receive-only antenna from the base to the highest point is ten feet.
                  (d)   Separation. There is no minimum or maximum separation
requirement for satellite receive-only antennas or antenna support structures
from other structures on the same lot.
                  (e)   Required screening. Ground-mounted satellite receive-
only antennas must be screened from view from abutting properties by at least
one of the following methods:
                     (i)   An opaque fence; or
                     (ii)   A row of evergreen plants rising to a height of a
least six feet at maturity.
               (3)   Other wireless facilities.
                  (a)   Location classification. For the purpose of determining
the appropriate locations for the placement of antennas and antenna support
structures other than amateur radio, TV, and satellite receive-only antennas,
the city is classified into land use areas based on the sensitivity of uses to
these facilities:
                     (i)   Interior Industrial (I-I) describes any property
within the CI or I Zoning Districts that is located more than 1,000 feet from
any district other than CI or I.
                     (ii)   Exterior Industrial (E-I) describes any property
within the CI or I Zoning Districts that is located 1,000 feet or less from any
district other than CI or I.
                     (iii)   Full Commercial (F-C) describes property within
the NC, LC, RC, or MU Zoning Districts that is located more than 600 feet from
the A, SF-6, SF-7, SF-10, SF-20, MF-1, MF-2, or IH District.
                     (iv)   Edge Commercial (E-C) describes property within the
NC, LC, RC, or MU Zoning Districts that is located 600 feet or less from the A,
SF-6, SF-7, SF-10, SF-20, MF-1 MF-2, MF, or IH District.
                     (v)   Wireless Corridor (WC) describes property within 75
feet of the right-of-way of a freeway or a principal or minor arterial roadway,
as indicated on the city's Thoroughfare Plan.
                     (vi)   Developed Residential (DR) describes property
within the A, SF-6, SF-7, SF-10, SF-20, MF-1 or MF-2 Districts, which:
                        i.   Is a recorded subdivision or final plat that has
had at least one building permit for a residential dwelling;
                        ii.   Is within the exterior walls of an existing
principal building used as a residential dwelling, including garages and
enclosed porches; or
                        iii.   Is within 600 feet of areas described in i. or
ii. above.
                     (vii)   Undeveloped Residential (UR) describes property
within the A, SF-6, SF-7, SF-10, SF-20, MF-1 or MF-2 Districts, that:
                        i.   Does not have a recorded subdivision or final
plat; or
                        ii.   Is a recorded subdivision but has not had a
building permit issued for a residential dwelling; and
                        iii.   Is not located within the area described as DR
above.
                     (viii)   Overlay (O) describes property listed as an
overlay in subsection 2.04.
                     (ix)   In the event of a conflict between one or more
locations listed in this subsection 3.04.B.27.c(3)(a), the strictest
requirement prevails.
                  (b)   Facility classifications. For the purpose of
determining the appropriate locations for the placement of antennas and antenna
support structures other than amateur radio, TV, and satellite receive-only
antennas, facilities are classified into types based on their impact:
                     (i)   One hundred thirty-foot monopole.
                        i.   This classification describes a monopole tower
that is more than 90 feet but not more than 130 feet in height.
                        ii.   One hundred thirty-foot monopole towers must be
designed to accommodate antenna co-locations by two or more additional
operators. The applicant must design the tower to reserve space within the
tower structure and the equipment yard for multiple operators.
                     (ii)   Ninety-foot monopole.
                        i.   This classification describes a monopole tower
that is more than 60 feet but not more than 90 feet in height. Antennas may
extend up to five feet above the highest point of the monopole.
                        ii.   Ninety-foot monopole towers must be designed to
accommodate at least one other antenna co-location. The applicant must design
the tower to reserve space within the tower structure and the equipment yard
for at least one additional operator.
                     (iii)   Sixty-foot monopole. This classification describes
a monopole tower that is not more than 60 feet in height. Antennas may extend
up to five feet above the height of the monopole.
                     (iv)   Level 4 stealth facility describes an antenna
mounted on an existing structure such as a building, water tower, clock tower,
steeple, sign, high-voltage tower, or light pole.
A facility is a Level 4 if the antenna and support structure are not screened
or hidden.
                     (v)   Level 3 stealth facility describes an antenna
mounted on an existing structure such as a building, water tower, clock tower,
steeple, sign, or light pole. A facility is a Level 3 if the antenna, support
structure, and ancillary equipment such as conduit are disguised with paint or
permanent finishes that match the colors or exterior materials of the building
or structure to which the antenna is mounted.
                     (vi)   Level 2 stealth facility describes an antenna
mounted to a monopole or an existing structure such as a building, water tower,
clock tower, steeple, sign, or light pole. A facility is a Level 2 if the
antenna, support structure, and ancillary equipment such as conduit are
disguised as a manmade or natural object such as a tree, light standard,
symbol, or art.
                     (vii)   Level 1 stealth facility describes an antenna
mounted to a monopole integrated into an existing structure such as a building,
clock tower, steeple, sign, flagpole, or light pole. A facility is a Level 1 if
the antenna, support structure, and ancillary equipment such as conduit are
completely invisible.
                  (c)   Permitted locations. Antenna facilities described in
subsection (b) above are allowed in accordance with Table 4: Allowed Facilities
by Zoning District.
   Table 4: Allowed Facilities by Zoning District
 I-I,      E-I,                E-C,  WV, Wirele
 Interi or Exteri or F-C, Full Comm. ss Corrid  UR, Undev. DR, Dev. O, Overla
 Indust    Indust    Comm.     Edge  or         Res.       Res.     y
 rial      rial
         I-I,   E-I,
         Interi Exteri or F-C, Full E-C,  WV,       UR,    DR, Dev. O, Overla
         or     Indust    Comm.     Comm. Wirele ss Undev. Res.     y
         Indust rial                Edge  Corrid or Res.
         rial
Monopole
130 foot P      S         S         X     X         X      X        X
90 foot  P      P         P         S     S         X      X        X
60 foot  P      P         P         P     P         S      X        X
Monopole
Level 4  P      P         P         P     P         S      X        X
Level 3  P      P         P         P     P         P      S        S
Level 2  P      P         P         P     P         P      S        S
Level 1  P      P         P         P     P         P      S        S
P = facility is administratively permitted; S = facility is permitted by
special exception; X = facility is not permitted
 
            d.   Application and review.
               (1)   Information required for all wireless communications
facilities. The applicant for a new wireless communications facility, including
free-standing towers and those attached to an existing structure, must provide
the following information:
                  (a)   Written description of the facility and the building or
property on which the facility is proposed.
                  (b)   Drawings of all equipment, structures, and antennas,
including photo simulations of the facility after it is installed.
2022 S-80
                  (c)   Analysis of coverage provided by existing facilities
within a three mile radius that demonstrates the gaps in coverage that the
proposed facility will address.
                  (d)   Name(s) of the telecommunications providers or other
users of the facility.
                  (e)   Information on whether the facility will connect to
other existing facilities and the identity of the backhaul provider.
               (2)   Review and approval.
                  (a)   For applications listed as "P" in Table 4: Allowed
Facilities by Zoning District, the Building Official will review the
application in accordance with the procedures listed in Chapter 150 of the
Cleburne Code of Ordinances.
                  (b)   Following approval, the permit to construct the
facility will remain valid for a period of 90 days. If the applicant has not
begun construction of the facility after 90 days, the permit approval is void.
            e.   Additional information required for specific use permit. In
addition to the information required in subsection 5.09, the Zoning
Administrator may require the following during the review of the specific use
permit:
               (1)   Analysis of potential co-location on existing facilities
and the location of these existing facilities. The analysis must include a
written description of efforts made to collocate on these facilities and an
explanation of why existing facilities are infeasible for co-location,
including any reports, studies, or correspondence between the applicant and the
owner or operator of the existing facility.
               (2)   A written statement addressing co-location or use of the
proposed facility by other telecommunications providers.
               (3)   A written description and documentation of any efforts
made to locate the facility in alternate locations not within the boundaries of
an area that requires a specific use permit.
            f.   Consideration of specific use permit. In considering the
request, the City Council may consider the following:
               (1)   The effect the wireless facility may have on the value of
the surrounding property.
               (2)   The potential for interference with the enjoyment of the
use of surrounding properties.
2022 S-80
               (3)   The aesthetics of the proposed facility, including the
effectiveness of stealth techniques in shielding antennas and other equipment
from view and the need for ongoing maintenance of stealth devices.
               (4)   The proposed height of the antenna facility.
               (5)   The zoning district and the adjoining zoning districts of
the property for which the specific use permit is sought.
               (6)   The unique conditions of the subject property or location.
            g.   Approval of specific use permit. The City Council, by simple
majority, may vote to approve a requested application subject to the finding
that co-location of this facility with a nearby existing antenna facility is
technically not feasible and that the application for specific use permit
complies with the following conditions:
               (1)   The wireless facility will permit co-location of other
operators on the facility and will proactively notify other potential providers
of the ability to co-locate on the facility;
               (2)   The wireless facility will accommodate other providers on
the facility;
               (3)   The applicant has identified its backhaul provider
connecting antenna sites; and
               (4)   The applicant will give notice to the city identifying any
provider who co-locates on the facility and identify its backhaul provider.
         27.   Dwelling, single-family (detached). A detached single-family
dwelling may be constructed in the D District subject to the minimum standards
and requirements of the SF-6 District.
         28.   Dwelling, single-family (attached - duplex).
            a.   A specific use permit may be required according to the
Permitted Use Chart.
            b.   Approval is subject to the following conditions. A lot of
record that is zoned within the MF-1 or MF-2 Districts that cannot comply with
the minimum lot area requirement may be developed as a duplex subject to the
minimum standards and requirements of the D District.
         29.   Reserved.
         30.   Data center standards.
            a.   Enhanced screening.
               (1)   A minimum 36-inch-high earthen berm with a 36-inch-high
opaque evergreen planting and evergreen trees six feet tall, spaced 30 feet on
center; or
               (2)   A six-foot masonry wall matching the building materials
may be used as an alternative.
            b.   Design standards.
               (1)   Must comply with Section 4.05.D design requirements,
allowing faux windows where needed. In the Industrial District, standards apply
only to the primary facade and one design element may be deducted.
            c.   Setbacks.
               (1)   One hundred-foot minimum setback from public rights-of-
way.
               (2)   One hundred-foot minimum setback from residentially zoned
properties, parks, schools, and sensitive uses.
            d.   Parking.
               (1)   No parking required for data processing or mechanical
areas.
            e.   Building height standards.
               (1)   The Industrial (I) District height standards may be
applied to Data Centers located in the Commercial/Industrial (C/I) District.
               (2)   All other applicable building and fire code requirements
shall remain in effect.
   3.05.   Location and Arrangement of Buildings.
      A.   Residential buildings on lots for single-family.
         1.   Each lot zoned SF-6, SF-7, SF-10, or SF-20 shall contain no more
than one principal building for use as a single-family dwelling or other
approved use (see subsection 3.03 Use Chart).
         2.   Principal buildings must have direct access to and from a public
street, approved access easement, or as provided in subsection 5.03 Alternative
Compliance.
      B.   Buildings on lots for multi-family, mixed-use, and nonresidential
uses.
         1.   Each lot zoned to a district other than those listed in
subsection 3.05.A.1 may contain one or more principal buildings for any
approved use (see subsection 3.03 Use Chart) provided all buildings conform to
applicable requirements for open space, access, circulation, parking, and
density.
         2.   Principal buildings must have access to and from a public street,
approved access easement, or as provided in subsection 5.03 Alternative
Compliance.
         3.   Areas used for required parking spaces and required open space
are intended to benefit buildings and uses on the same lot. No abutting or
neighboring building or lot may claim that the use of a parking area or open
space on another lot fulfills the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance unless
authorized under a shared parking agreement as provided in subsection 4.01
Landscaping Requirements or subsection 4.03 Parking Standards.
   3.06.   Uses with Flammable, Toxic, and Hazardous Materials.
      A.   A use that involves the storage, manufacture, utilization, or
dispensing of substances that may cause danger to public health, safety, or
welfare must operate within the limits and conditions specified in the latest
edition of both the International Fire Code and International Building Code
that is adopted by the city.
      B.   The emission of toxic or explosive vapors, dust, or aerosols into
the atmosphere shall not exceed, at the boundary of the property where the
emission occurs, either of the following:
         1.   Twenty-five percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) sometimes
also referred to as the lower flammable limit (LFL); and
         2.   Fifty percent of the established permissible exposure limit (PEL)
or threshold limit value (TLV).
      C.   No flammable, toxic, or other hazardous material shall be released
into or upon any utility line, holding area, pit, dump, open ground, stream, or
drainage way without proper treatment under all adopted city, state, and
federal guidelines.
      D.   No container, storage tank, building, or facility for any flammable,
toxic, or other hazardous material shall be authorized for construction until
the Fire Marshal approves the container size, location, design, and
construction as a part of the building permit application. The Fire Chief or
their designee has the authority to deny any application that does not conform
to the International Fire Code and International Building Code requirements.
      E.   The Fire Marshal is the official responsible for interpreting and
enforcing this subsection 3.06.
   3.07.   Nonconformities.
      A.   Intent of provisions.
         1.   Existence of nonconformities.
            a.   Nonconformities are uses, buildings, structures, lots, or
additions that do not conform to the standards of this Zoning Ordinance.
            b.   This subsection 3.07 establishes the process for bringing
nonconformities into compliance with this Zoning Ordinance while respecting the
property owner's rights and investment-backed expectations.
            c.   This subsection does not attempt to distinguish "legally
nonconforming" from "illegally nonconforming."
               (1)   Nonconformities are considered qualified under this
subsection 3.07 if the city issued a permit or otherwise allowed for their
initiation or construction under regulations existing at the time a permit was
issued or an allowance was made.
               (2)   Nonconformities that are permissible under this Zoning
Ordinance but are initiated or constructed without a permit must cease
operation until the city issues a permit.
               (3)   Nonconformities that are not permissible are in violation
of this Zoning Ordinance and must be removed or cease operation immediately.
            d.   The property owner is responsible for demonstrating that the
use, building, structure, lot, or addition in question complied with the
standards in place at the time of its inception or construction and became
nonconforming due to the adoption of new standards after its inception or
construction.
            e.   If the City Council believes that a nonconforming use is
harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of neighboring properties or the
general public and will not comply in a timely manner with the regulations of
this Zoning Ordinance, the Council may initiate the amortization of
nonconforming uses process as outlined in subsection 5.10.
         2.   Categories of nonconformities. Nonconformities occur in three
general categories, or combination thereof.
            (1)   Nonconforming uses. A nonconforming use occurs when an
existing use is no longer allowed in a zoning district.
            (2)   Nonconforming structures. A nonconforming building or
structure can have a lesser setback, yard width, height, or lot area or
dimension requirement than required by the Zoning Ordinance.
            (3)   Nonconforming lots. A nonconforming lot can be nonconforming
as to lot area or dimension requirement.
         3.   Continuation of nonconformities.
            a.   Nonconformities are hereby declared incompatible with the
uses, structures, and lots authorized under this Zoning Ordinance.
            b.   It is the declared intent of this subsection that
nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures eventually be eliminated and be
required to comply with the regulations of the Zoning Ordinance, having due
regard for the property rights of the person affected, the public welfare, and
the character of the surrounding area.
            c.   The owner of a nonconforming use, nonconforming structure, or
nonconforming lot is only allowed to maintain, repair, or alter the use,
building, structure, or lot in conformity with the provisions of this
subsection 3.07.
      B.   Summary of nonconforming regulations.
   Table 5: Summary of Nonconforming Regulations
                          Action                     Regulation
                                                     Any legally conforming
                                                     existing lot platted prior
                          Existing platted lots      to April 12, 2022 is a
                                                     conforming lot (subsection
                                                     3.07.C)
                                                     Minimum lot area is
                                                     determined by the
Nonconforming Lot                                    respective district,
                                                     except that a lot, parcel,
                          Residential lot exemption  or tract having less area
                                                     than required that was
                                                     created prior to April 12,
                                                     2022 may be used for a
                                                     single-family dwelling
                                                     (subsection 3.07.C)
                                                     A conforming or
                                                     nonconforming use located
                          Conforming use in a        in a nonconforming
Nonconforming Structure   nonconforming structure    structure may be changed
                                                     to another use that is a
                                                     conforming use (subsection
                                                     3.07.D)
                          A nonconforming structure shall not be expanded or
Prohibited expansion      increased as of the effective date of this ordinance
                          except as provided in (subsection 3.07.E.1)
Nonconforming use         A nonconforming use may expand inside an existing
expansion                 building (subsection 3.07.E.3)
Structure is removed from The nonconforming structure shall be considered to
the premises              have been discontinued, regardless of intent
                          (subsection 3.07.E.6)
Parking or landscaping is Expansion or new use must provide additional parking
nonconforming             or landscaping, or both (subsection 3.07.F)
                          If destroyed 51% or more of previous appraised value,
Total destruction         the structure is subject to the standards of the
                          Zoning Ordinance (subsection 3.07.G.1)
                          If destroyed less than 51% of previous appraised
Partial destruction       value, the owner may rebuild the structure to its
                          previous condition (subsection 3.07.G.2)
                          May be relocated within the same platted lot and must
Relocation                comply with all screening and setback requirements
                          (subsection 3.07.H)
                                                     The owner may not expand a
                                                     nonconforming use except
                                                     within an existing
                                                     building. A nonconforming
                          Nonconforming use          use may not change to
                          expansions and changes     another nonconforming use
                                                     but may change to a
                                                     conforming use (subsection
                                                     3.07.D; subsection
                                                     3.07.E.3)
                                                     The owner may expand a
                                                     nonconforming use located
                          Expansion located outdoors outdoors subject to
                                                     restrictions (subsection
Nonconforming Use                                    3.07.E.3.b)
                                                     Expansion or new use must
                          Parking or landscaping is  provide additional parking
                          nonconforming              or landscaping, or both
                                                     (subsection 3.07.F)
                                                     The nonconforming use is
                          Nonconforming use          permanently discontinued
                          abandonment                after six months
                                                     (subsection 3.07.I)
                                                     The Board of Adjustment
                                                     may allow the
                          Reinstatement of           reinstatement of a
                          nonconforming use          nonconforming use if the
                                                     owner demonstrates it was
                                                     not abandoned (subsection
                                                     3.07.J)
 
      C.   Existing platted lots are conforming lots. Any existing vacant lot
platted prior to the Zoning Ordinance effective date that was conforming at the
time it was platted or replatted is considered a conforming lot for the
purposes of constructing a single-family residence.
      D.   Changing uses.
         1.   Changing a nonconforming use to a conforming use. Any
nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use. Once a conforming use is
established and the nonconforming use ceases, the use shall not change back to
a nonconforming use.
         2.   Changing nonconforming use to another nonconforming use. A
nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use.
         3.   Establishing a conforming use in a nonconforming structure. Where
a conforming use is located in a nonconforming structure, the use may be
changed to another conforming use by the process outlined in subsection 3.07.E
Expansion of Nonconforming Uses and Structures.
      E.   Expansion of nonconforming uses and structures. An expansion of a
nonconforming use or nonconforming structure is allowed in accordance with the
following provisions.
         1.   Prohibited expansion or reoccupation. A nonconforming use or
nonconforming structure shall not be expanded or increased on or after the
effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, except as provided in subsection
3.07.E Expansion of Nonconforming Uses and Structures.
         2.   Nonconforming use expansion in existing building. A nonconforming
use may be enlarged, increased, or extended within an existing building
provided:
            a.   No structural alteration may be made on or in the existing
building except those required by law to preserve the building in a
structurally sound condition.
            b.   Work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on
ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures,
wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding 50% of the current replacement
value of the building.
            c.   The number of dwelling units or rooms in a nonconforming
residential use shall not be increased so as to exceed the number of dwelling
units or rooms existing at the time the use became a nonconforming use.
         3.   Nonconforming use prohibited from expansion beyond existing
building.
            a.   A nonconforming use established within any building shall not
be extended to occupy any land outside the building.
            b.   A nonconforming use established outdoors on a platted lot may
expand within the platted lot if the expansion does not increase the degree of
nonconformity to applicable sections of this Zoning Ordinance or City Code
regarding nuisances; emission of sound, vibration, glare, or particulate
matter; height; setbacks; or outside storage located in a front yard.
         4.   Substandard lot, parcel, or tract and substandard replatting
exemptions.
            a.   Substandard lots. The minimum lot requirements for the various
zoning districts listed in Section
155.2 shall be in accordance with their respective districts, except that the
owner of a lot having less area than required by the Zoning Ordinance may
construct an authorized use if the lot was an official Lot of Record prior to
April 12, 2022, or an official Lot of Record within the CI, Commercial/
Industrial Flex District prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
            b.   Substandard parcels or tracts. A substandard parcel or tract
is an unplatted piece of property that was created by a deed or other
conveyance, and cannot comply with the minimum lot area and width requirements
for the zoning district in which the property is located, and does not qualify
as a lot of record under this Zoning Ordinance.
               (1)   To be entitled to the rights afforded by this subsection
b, a substandard parcel or tract must be recorded in the county real property
records before March 22, 1996 and must:
                  (a)   Have an area of not less than 4,000 square feet;
                  (b)   Be not less than 40 feet wide, or 25 feet wide for a
parcel or tract in the DTC, Downtown Core Overlay, measured at the street or at
the building line; and
                  (c)   Have frontage on an existing street.
               (2)   A substandard parcel or tract may be used for a detached
single-family residential use if the use is permitted in the zoning district in
which the property is located and the parcel or tract complies with the
requirements of this subsection 3.07.E.4.b.
               (3)   Building setback requirements.
                  (a)   Front yard setbacks shall comply with regulations
established in subsection 2.05.A or the established build line, as applicable.
                  (b)   Rear yard setbacks shall be 10% of the lot depth or ten
feet, whichever is greater.
                     (i)   No rear yard shall be less than ten feet.
                     (ii)   No rear yard shall be required to be more than 20
feet.
                  (c)   Side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 10% of the lot
width, and may not be less than five feet.
                  (d)   Corner lots with a side yard setback adjacent to a
street shall be a minimum of ten feet or 20% of the lot width, whichever is
less.
               (4)   Development of a substandard parcel or tract shall comply
with all additional provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
               (5)   The Building Official may issue a building permit for a
substandard parcel or tract, and no plat shall be required.
               (6)   This subsection b does not apply if a substandard parcel
or tract is used with one or more contiguous parcels, tracts, or lots for a
single use or development, and the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance apply
to the aggregation of the property as if the aggregation were a single parcel,
tract, or lot.
               (7)   A substandard parcel or tract that is aggregated with
other property to form a site may not be disaggregated after December 10, 2019,
to form a site that is smaller than the minimum lot area requirement under
subsection 2.05.A.
            c.   Substandard replatting exemptions. Existing lots of record
that are of insufficient size to construct a single-family dwelling may be
replatted with adjacent existing lots of record if the resulting lots meet the
criteria listed in section 3.07.E.4.c.1 below.
               (1)   For properties in the SF-7 District, existing platted lots
that are considered non-conforming may be replatted and approved
administratively if the replat qualifies as a minor replat and all newly
created or replatted lots meet at least one of the following required minimum
lot dimensions listed below:
                  (a)   Lot width;
                  (b)   Lot depth; or
                  (c)   Lot size.
               (2)   For properties in the SF-7 District, existing platted lots
proposed to be replatted that qualify as a minor replat but require a variance
to all three of the lot dimension requirements listed in subsection
3.07.E.4.c.1 above, must be approved by City Council, following a
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, as outlined in
Ch. 154 of this code.
               (3)   Development of a substandard replatted lot shall comply
with all other requirements of the SF-7 District.
         5.   Expansion of nonconforming structures with conforming uses.
Buildings or structures that do not conform to the regulations or development
standards in the Zoning Ordinance may only increase or expand the nonconforming
structure in compliance with this Zoning Ordinance. A nonconforming structure
shall not increase in extent or degree of nonconformity.
         6.   Removal of nonconforming structure. Removal of all or a portion
of a nonconforming structure, regardless of intent, forfeits the portion of the
structure that was removed. The owner may not reconstruct the portion of the
structure that was removed except in conformance with this Zoning Ordinance.
      F.   Nonconforming regarding parking or landscaping.
         1.   Nonconforming regarding parking requirements. This subsection
3.07.F.1 applies when:
            a.   A nonconforming use is replaced by a conforming use;
            b.   A nonconforming structure is occupied by a conforming use; or
            c.   An existing parking facility becomes nonconforming by the
adoption of this Zoning Ordinance.
               (1)   Whenever a building or use is enlarged in area, number of
units, seating capacity, or in any other way that increases required parking,
and the parking required by the new use exceeds available parking on site by
25% or less, the building or use shall meet the applicable parking and fire
lane requirements of subsection 4.03 and all newly installed parking surfaces
shall meet the pavement requirements of subsection 4.03.
               (2)   Whenever a building or use is enlarged in area, number of
units, seating capacity, or in any other way that increases required parking,
and the parking required by the new use exceeds available parking on site by
more than 25% but equal to or less than 50%, the building or use shall meet the
applicable parking and fire lane requirements of subsection 4.03 and the entire
parking area, new and existing, shall meet the requirements of subsection 4.03.
               (3)   If the expansion increases the required parking to more
than ten spaces, the entire parking area must be fully landscaped with islands
and perimeter buffers as required in subsection 4.01.
         2.   Nonconforming regarding landscaping requirements. This subsection
3.07.F.2 applies when:
            a.   A nonconforming use is replaced by a conforming use that
requires additional landscaping;
            b.   A nonconforming structure is occupied by a conforming use that
requires additional landscaping;
            c.   Existing landscaping becomes nonconforming by the adoption of
this Zoning Ordinance; or
            d.   A conforming structure or use is expanded.
               (1)   Whenever a building or use is enlarged and does not have
adequate landscaping, and the enlargement is less than or equal to 50% by area,
the building or use shall meet the applicable landscaping requirements of
subsection 4.01 for the enlarged area only.
               (2)   Whenever a building or use is enlarged and does not have
adequate landscaping, and the enlargement is greater than 50% by area, the
entire building and site shall meet the applicable landscaping requirements of
subsection 4.01.
      G.   Restoration of nonconforming structures.
         1.   Total destruction. If a nonconforming structure is damaged or
destroyed and the damage is greater than 50% of its total appraised value
according to the most recent county appraisal prior to the damage occurring,
the nonconforming structure cannot be rebuilt except in conformance with the
Zoning Ordinance.
         2.   Partial destruction. If a nonconforming structure is damaged by
fire, explosion, rioting, or natural disaster, or catastrophic event and the
damage is 50% or less of its total appraised value according to the most recent
county appraisal prior to the damage occurring, the nonconforming structure may
be rebuilt to its previous condition, including dimensions and setbacks.
            a.   The construction must comply with all current building codes
and zoning regulations in effect at the time the structure received a building
permit for initial construction and for any subsequent changes, additions, or
expansions to the structure that occurred following the initial construction of
the structure.
            b.   Reconstruction must commence within 12 months of the date the
damage occurred (see subsection 3.07.G.3 below).
            c.   If the Zoning Administrator cannot determine the applicable
regulations, the Board of Adjustment shall hold a hearing and shall take
evidence such as previously adopted ordinances, photographs, and tax records to
determine the standards that apply to the reconstruction.
            d.   Any change to a dimension or a setback of the nonconforming
structure may be approved by a zoning variance.
         3.   Reconstruction of nonconforming structure with a nonconforming
use.
            a.   If the nonconforming structure contained a nonconforming use,
the Building Official may authorize the nonconforming use to continue during
reconstruction of the nonconforming structure, if the nonconforming use is
conducted according to all applicable city codes.
            b.   If the Building Official orders the nonconforming use to cease
during reconstruction of the nonconforming structure, the nonconforming use may
continue after a certificate of occupancy is granted for the reconstruction,
subject to d. below.
         4.   Failure to begin reconstruction. If the owner of a nonconforming
structure fails to begin reconstruction of the destroyed structure within 12
months of the date of destruction under the provisions of subsection 3.07.g.2,
the nonconforming structure and any nonconforming use that existed within the
structure is automatically discontinued and abandoned.
      H.   Movement of nonconforming structure. The property owner may relocate
a nonconforming structure within the same platted lot, if the relocated
structure complies with all other applicable requirements.
      I.   Abandonment of nonconforming uses.
         1.   A certificate of occupancy may be issued for the continuance of a
nonconforming use, or to a new owner or operator of the same use, so long as
the nonconforming use was legal at the time of the adoption of this Zoning
Ordinance and has not been abandoned as defined in this subsection 3.07.I.
         2.   A nonconforming use is considered abandoned when the
nonconforming use ceases for a period of six consecutive calendar months.
         3.   A use becomes abandoned six months after the occurrence of the
first of any of the following events:
            a.   On the date when the use of land is physically vacated;
            b.   On the date the use ceases to be actively involved in the sale
of merchandise or the provision of services;
            c.   On the date of termination of any lease or contract under
which the nonconforming use has occupied the land; or
            d.   On the date a final reading of water or power meters is made
by the applicable utility provider(s).
         4.   Once a nonconforming use, including a residential use has been
abandoned, the nonconforming use shall not be allowed to be reintroduced within
the applicable zoning district. This prohibition of the reoccupation or
reintroduction of an abandoned nonconforming use shall be enforced by the
denial of building permit or certificate of occupancy applications.
         5.   A nonconforming use, once abandoned, may continue if
reestablished in a similar building within six months.
         6.   Any nonconforming use that does not involve a permanent building
or structure that is moved from the premises shall be considered abandoned if a
similar building or structure is not reestablished within six months.
         7.   Unless the nonconforming use status is reinstated pursuant to
subsection 3.07.J Loss of and Reinstatement of Nonconforming Use Status, an
abandoned use shall not be instituted on that parcel or other parcel in any
district which does not permit the abandoned use.
      J.   Loss of and reinstatement of nonconforming use status.
         1.   Loss of nonconforming use status. If the Zoning Administrator
determines that a nonconforming use has met the definition of abandonment under
subsection 3.07.I.3 above, the use shall not be instituted on that parcel or
other parcel in any district that does not permit the discontinued use.
         2.   Application for nonconforming use status reinstatement.
            a.   The owner or operator of the abandoned nonconforming use may
submit a written application to the Board of Adjustment to have the
nonconforming rights reinstated.
            b.   Written application for reinstatement of nonconforming rights
must be made within 30 calendar days after the denial of building permit or
certificate of occupancy application for the nonconforming use.
         3.   Board of Adjustment hearing.
            a.   The Board of Adjustment shall hold a hearing on the requested
reinstatement of a nonconforming use status within 30 calendar days of the
request or the next scheduled Board of Adjustment meeting, whichever is sooner.
            b.   The Zoning Administrator will prepare a report with written
findings. The applicant and the Zoning Administrator are jointly responsible
for providing evidence in support of any findings to the Board of Adjustment.
            c.   Evidence in support of reinstatement may include invoices,
water, sewer, or electricity usage records, or photographs or receipts
demonstrating the owner's investment in maintaining the use. The failure of the
owner or operator to remove on premise signs may not be used as the sole
evidence of a continuing use.
            d.   The Board of Adjustment shall use the above abandonment
criteria in deliberating the case.
         4.   Board of Adjustment decision. After opening the public hearing
and receiving testimony from the applicant and any member of the public, the
Board of Adjustment may act to approve or deny reinstatement of the
nonconforming use.
         5.   Effect of approval.
            a.   Approval by the Board of Adjustment immediately reinstates the
nonconforming use status and allows the applicant to obtain a building permit
or certificate of occupancy if the Board of Adjustment finds that the applicant
has provided sufficient evidence that the use was not discontinued for longer
than six months.
            b.   Reinstatement of the nonconforming use status by the Board of
Adjustment expires if a building permit is not applied for within 90 days of
the Board action.
            c.   Denial by the Board of Adjustment is final.
      K.   Nonconformity created by acquisition of right-of-way.
         1.   Lawful conforming structure.
            a.   If a property is occupied by a lawful structure and the
acquisition of right-of-way by eminent domain proceedings, dedication, or
purchase by the city, county, state, or a federal agency creates a
nonconforming structure, lot, or setback, the structure remains a lawful
conforming structure to the extent the nonconformity results from the
acquisition of right-of-way.
            b.   If a structure described in subsection 3.07.K.1.a is damaged
or destroyed by natural causes the structure may be rebuilt.
         2.   When owner receives compensation for screening or landscaping.
            a.   If a property owner receives compensation for screening or
landscaping due to right-of-way acquisition, the owner must relocate fencing or
landscaping originally located on the acquired property in accordance with
subsection 4.01 and subsection 4.02.
            b.   If the property owner contends that the right-of-way
acquisition makes relocating the fencing or landscaping impractical due to
insufficient room on the property, the owner may apply to the Board of
Adjustment for a waiver from the requirements of subsection 3.07.K.2.a or
propose to the Board that an alternative location be accepted.
         3.   When owner receives compensation for demolition.
            a.   The Building Official will not issue a certificate of
occupancy for a structure if the owner has received compensation for the
demolition of the structure or other curative measures until the structure
meets all applicable ordinances, or the curative measures for which the owner
received compensation have been completed.
            b.   For purposes of this subsection, CURATIVE MEASURES are those
actions, corrections, repairs or improvements identified in an appraisal or
similar valuation analysis prepared in the context of considering damages to
the remainder suffered as a result of the acquisition of a portion of property.
   3.08.   Accessory Buildings and Uses.
      A.   Residential accessory buildings and uses.
         1.   The following regulations apply to accessory buildings that are
120 square feet or greater on a lot developed with detached SF or duplex uses.
Table 6: Residential Accessory Building Requirements
         Lots Less Than 10,000 Lots 10,000 sq. ft. or Lots 21,780 sq. ft. or
Standard sq. ft.               Greater But Less Than  Greater
                               21,780 sq. ft.
                     Lots Less Than Lots 10,000 sq. ft. Lots 21,780 sq. ft.
Standard             10,000 sq. ft. or Greater But Less or Greater
                                    Than 21,780 sq. ft.
Maximum Square
Footage of All       400 sq. ft.    1,000 sq. ft.       10% of the lot or
Accessory Buildings                                     property
(Combined Area)
Maximum Height of    Buildings 400 sq. ft. or less = 12 ft.; buildings
Accessory Buildings  greater than 400 sq. ft. = 16 ft.
Maximum Number of    2              Unlimited           Unlimited
Accessory Buildings
Maximum Allowed      Principal buildings and accessory buildings shall not
Accessory Building   exceed the allowable coverage percentage of the zoning
Area Coverage        district in which they are located.
Minimum Front        Behind principal building
Setback
Minimum Side Setback 5 ft.
Minimum Rear Setback 5 ft.
Minimum Setbacks for 10 ft.*        15 ft.*             15 ft.*
Corner Lots
Prohibited Locations Accessory buildings in easements are prohibited.
                     Accessory buildings used for sheltering livestock
Barns and other      (e.g., chickens, hogs, horses) require a minimum of
Types Livestock      five acres and a minimum setback of 100 feet from the
Housing              nearest property line and 200 feet from any dwelling on
                     a separate lot or property.
* No accessory building may extend beyond the front plane of the main
building.
 
         2.   Accessory buildings and uses incidental to other permitted uses
are permitted within residential zoning districts and include private garages,
carports, tool house, greenhouse, home workshop, private stables (no rental),
barns, or coops (no rental), pool house associated with private swimming pool,
and garden shelter.
         3.   Structures with roofs or coverings partially open to the sky,
such as pergolas, count toward square footage and number limitations for
accessory buildings but do not count towards lot coverage limitations.
Accessory buildings must be fully detached from the principal building. An
accessory building that is connected to the principal building is considered
part of the principal building.
         4.   The following regulations apply to a guest house/in-law quarters
within an accessory building or as a use attached to the principal building.
            a.   The minimum size for a guest house/in-law quarters is 350
square feet when built over a garage, and 450 square feet when built as a free-
standing structure.
            b.   The maximum size of a guest house/in-law quarters is 1,000
square feet or 50% of the floor area of the principal building, not including
the garage, whichever is less.
            c.   A guest house/in-law quarters may exceed the height maximum
for an accessory structure in subsection 3.08.A.1 above but shall not exceed
the height of the principal building.
            d.   The guest house/in-law quarters must be connected to the same
water, electricity, and gas meter as the principal building.
            e.   The guest house/in-law quarters may not be constructed before
the principal building has been completed.
            f.   Only one guest house/in-law quarters is allowed on a lot.
            g.   At least one additional parking space is required for a guest
house/in-law quarters (see subsection 4.03).
         5.   Architectural elements for residential accessory buildings.
            a.   All accessory buildings that are 240 square feet or larger are
required to have a roof pitch, surface materials, and color that resembles the
pitch, materials, and color of the roof of the principal building.
            b.   Accessory buildings that are less than 240 square feet are not
required to match the roof of the principal building but must, at a minimum,
maintain a roof surface that is protected from damage and deterioration by
asphalt or composition shingles or other common roofing material finished in a
painted, treated, or non-reflective and rust-proof surface.
      B.   Nonresidential accessory buildings.
         1.   Building façade finish. The exterior façade of all accessory
buildings must match the principal building with respect to exterior materials
and roof pitch.
         2.   Accessory building height.
            a.   The maximum height of a nonresidential accessory building is
the same as the height of the nearest principal building on the same lot,
regardless of the maximum allowable height under the zoning district.
            b.   The maximum floor area of a nonresidential accessory building
is 50% of the floor area of the principal building.
            c.   The use of a nonresidential accessory building is limited to
those uses shown in subsection 3.03.
(Ord. 04-2022-34, passed 4-12-22; Am. Ord. 02-2023-09, passed 2-28-23; Am. Ord.
01-2025-01, passed 1-14-25; Am. Ord. 04-2025-15, passed 4-22-25; Am. Ord. 07-
2025-23, passed 7-22-25)
§ 155.4 SITE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   4.01.   Landscaping Requirements.
      A.   Purpose. This subsection 4.01 is established for the following
purposes:
         1.   Provide requirements and guidelines for residential use and
nonresidential use landscaping;
         2.   Encourage a variety of species including trees, shrubs, and other
vegetation;
         3.   Encourage creativity and diversity using a variety of landscaping
methods;
         4.   Ensure the aesthetic appeal of properties in Cleburne and improve
resistance to drought and disease; and
         5.   Minimize adverse impacts of light, noise, movement, and surface
heat gain throughout the city.
      B.   Applicability.
         1.   This subsection 4.01 applies to all new development at the time
an application for a building permit or site plan is submitted for approval.
         2.   Existing uses that do not comply with this subsection 4.01 and
are expanded must conform under the conditions of subsection 3.07.F.2.
         3.   To promote variety and creativity and to prevent plantings in
easements or other unsuitable areas, the Zoning Administrator may approve an
administrative variance of 10% from any numerical standard in this subsection
4.01.
         4.   Properties in the Downtown Core Overlay are exempt from the
standards of this subsection.
         5.   Unless otherwise specified, at the time of planting, all trees
must be a minimum of three inches caliper as measured six inches above the
ground and all shrubs must be a minimum of five gallons. Multi-trunk trees may
be used to fulfill the caliper requirements at planting if the diameter of the
largest trunk plus the average diameter of all other trunks is equal to at
least three inches.
         6.   All plant material must be selected from Table 9: Approved Plant
Material List except as provided in subsection 4.01.C.4.
         7.   Any surface not occupied by buildings, sidewalks, parking lots,
trees, shrubs, planting beds, signs or other permitted fixtures shall be
planted with sod, turf, or other living ground cover with the following
exceptions:
            a.   Up to 50% of the areas described in subsection 4.01.B.7 may be
planted using river rock, crushed or decomposed granite, volcanic rock, or
similar non-living and weed-resistant ground cover subject to the maintenance
requirements of subsection 4.01.C.3.
            b.   Artificial turf may be utilized in a rear yard subject to the
maintenance requirements of this subsection 4.01.C.3.
      C.   General landscaping requirements.
         1.   Nonresidential use landscaping requirements.
            a.   Landscaping in any district not zoned SF, MF, or A shall be
required according to this subsection 4.01.C.1.
   Table 7: Nonresidential Landscaping Requirements (Section References)
 
Subsection Number Subsection Title
4.01.C.1.b        Landscaped edge along street right-of-way
4.01.C.1.c        Parking lot landscaping
4.01.C.1.d        Landscaping for corner lots
4.01.C.1.e        Landscaping and screening for parking lots adjacent to
                  residential areas
4.01.C.1.f        Building perimeter plantings for buildings 50,000 square feet
                  or larger
4.01.C.1.g        Landscaping standards for industrial development
 
            b.   Landscaped edge along street right-of-way. All nonresidential
uses in districts other than SF, MF, and A shall comply with the following
requirements (development in the I, Industrial District must conform with
subsection 4.01.C.1.g):
               (1)   Landscaped edge. A landscaped edge shall be provided
adjacent to all streets according to the designation of the street on the
adopted Master Thoroughfare Plan.
                  (a)   The landscaped edge shall be the following minimum
widths, exclusive of street right-of-way.
                     (i)   Landscaped edge width adjacent to a freeway: 20
feet;
                     (ii)   Landscaped edge width adjacent to an arterial
street: 15 feet;
                     (iii)   Landscaped edge width adjacent to a collector
street: ten feet;
                     (iv)   Landscaped edge width adjacent to a local street:
ten feet.
                  (b)   Within the landscaped edge, one tree shall be planted
per 30 linear feet of street frontage. The Zoning Administrator may approve the
grouping or clustering of trees to accommodate driveway spacing, utilities,
drainage facilities, or similar site features.
               (2)   Vehicle headlight screening abutting the landscaped edge.
Where parking lots, drives, and common access easements abut the landscaped
edge, shrubs shall be planted to form a continuous buffer adjacent to the
landscape edge (see Figure 10: Example of Parking Lot Headlight Screening).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7824.png]
 
                  (a)   A berm may be placed within the landscaped edge in lieu
of the required shrubs unless needed for a headlight screen (see subsection
4.01.C.1.e).
                  (b)   The number of required shrubs shall be calculated
solely on the area of the required landscaped edge.
                  (c)   The berm must be 18 to 40 inches above the average
grade of the street and parking lot curbs.
                  (d)   The slope of the berm shall not exceed a 33% grade.
            c.   Parking lot landscaping. Any nonresidential use parking area
that contains more than ten parking spaces shall provide the following
landscaping in addition to the landscaped edge required by subsection
4.01.C.1.b(1):
               (1)   Each row of parking must terminate with a planting bed
equivalent in size to one parking space on a single row of parking and two
parking spaces on a double row of parking as shown in Figure 11: Parking Buffer
Requirement for 90-Degree Parking.
                  (a)   Each parking island must be planted with a minimum of
one shade tree or two ornamental trees;
                  (b)   Areas of parking islands that do not contain trees must
be planted with sod or living plant material at the time the city issues a
certificate of occupancy;
               (2)   Each parking space must be no more than 100 feet from a
parking island. The Zoning Administrator may require additional parking islands
in the middle of rows to meet this requirement.
               (3)   In parking lots with more than 50 spaces, three feet of
parking buffer shall be provided for 90 degree parking with two rows facing
each other as shown in Figure 11: Parking Buffer Requirement for 90-Degree
Parking.
                  (a)   Parking buffers must be provided at a minimum of every
third row of parking.
                  (b)   The parking buffer must run the entire length of the
row.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7822.png]
 
               (4)   All landscaped areas shall be protected by either a raised
six-inch concrete curb or wheel stops permanently fixed in the ground.
               (5)   The requirements listed above do not apply to structured
parking garages.
               (6)   Expansion of existing parking areas. When an existing
parking area that is nonconforming with this subsection 4.01.C.1.c is altered
or expanded by more than 50% and the expansion increases the number of spaces
to more than ten, parking lot landscaping shall be provided in accordance with
the above standards (see subsection 3.07.F.1).
            d.   Landscaping for corner lots. Corner lots at the intersection
of two or more arterial streets shall comply with the following landscaping
requirements in addition to the required plantings for the landscaped edge and
parking lot landscaping:
               (1)   A minimum landscaped area of 500 square feet shall be
located at the intersection corner of the lot.
               (2)   Within the landscaped area, the developer must plant an
additional three shade trees, or substitute two ornamental trees for one shade
tree, or 50 square feet of shrubs or flowering plants per one shade tree.
               (3)   This landscaped area shall be provided within an area
measured a minimum distance of 40 feet from the projected corner of the
intersection on both sides of the lot.
               (4)   The Zoning Administrator may authorize minor adjustments
to this requirement, such as splitting the planting area into two or more
smaller areas, if the minimum required size is provided in close proximity to
the intersection.
            e.   Landscaping and screening for parking lots adjacent to
residential areas.
               (1)   Where more than three parking spaces are constructed
within 50 feet of property zoned as an SF or MF District and there is no
existing opaque fence, wall, berm, or landscaped screen between the new parking
and the SF or MF property, one of the following must be placed adjacent to the
parking spaces for sound and headlight attenuation:
                  (a)   A continuous screen of shrubs growing to at least 36
inches in height and meeting the watering and maintenance requirements of this
subsection; or
                  (b)   A buffer of 20 feet must be provided between the
parking area and the property line with the SF or MF zoned property.
               (2)   Landscaping buffers are not required for developments
smaller than two acres.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7820.png]
 
            f.   Building perimeter plantings for buildings 50,000 square feet
or larger.
               (1)   Perimeter plantings are required for any single building
or group of buildings in a single unified development that equal or exceed
50,000 square feet in gross floor area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7818.png]
 
               (2)   These plantings are intended to provide pedestrian areas
while breaking up the large areas of impervious surface.
               (3)   One shade tree or two ornamental trees are required for
every 10,000 square feet of gross building area.
               (4)   Trees planted to fulfill the requirements of this
subsection 4.01.C.1.f must be planted within 30 feet of the front façade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7816.png]
 
               (5)   The developer may decide how to distribute the required
plantings as long the plantings meet the standards specified in this subsection
4.01.C.1.f.
               (6)   Administrative adjustments.
                  (a)   The Zoning Administrator may reduce the requirements of
this subsection 4.01.C.1.f when additional pedestrian features such as plazas,
seating areas, fountains and outdoor recreation facilities are provided.
                  (b)   These facilities must occupy an area equal to or
greater than 5% of the building's total gross floor area.
            g.   Landscaping standards for industrial development.
               (1)   Development in the I, Industrial District must provide a
landscaped edge as described in 4.01.C.1.b(1) along any public street or right-
of-way that is of a collector classification or higher.
               (2)   A buffer must be installed between development in the I,
Industrial District and any SF or MF district, unless the conditions of
subsection 4.02.C.1.c are present at the time the first certificate of
occupancy is issued on the property.
                  (a)   Within a buffer that is at lest 50 feet wide, a single
row of shade trees from Table 9: Approved Plant Material List must be planted
at 30 feet on center.
                  (b)   Within a buffer that is less than 50 feet wide, a
double row of alternating shade trees from Table 9: Approved Plant Material
List must be planted at 30 feet on center.
         2.   Residential landscaping requirements. Residential landscaping
shall be required in all SF and MF zoning districts according to the following
subsections:
   Table 8: Residential Landscaping Requirements
 
Subsection Number Subsection Title
4.01.C.2.a        Multi-family and townhome landscaping requirements
4.01.C.2.b        Single-family detached residential and duplex
 
            a.   Multi-family and townhome landscaping requirements.
               (1)   Landscaped edge. Except in the DTC, Downtown Core Overlay,
and the CS, Cleburne Station Overlay, a landscaped edge shall be provided
adjacent to all streets.
                  (a)   The landscaped edge shall be a minimum width of 15
feet, exclusive of street right-of-way.
                  (b)   Within the landscaped edge, one tree shall be planted
per 40 feet of street frontage.
                  (c)   The Zoning Administrator may approve the grouping or
clustering of trees within the landscaped edge to accommodate driveway spacing,
utilities, drainage facilities or similar site features.
               (2)   Shrub buffer for multi-family parking lots and drives.
Where parking lots and driveways abut the landscaped edge, shrubs shall be
planted to form a continuous buffer along the boundary line between the parking
lot and landscaped edge.
                  (a)   The number of shrubs required is calculated based on
the area of the required landscaped edge.
                  (b)   A berm may be placed within the landscaped edge in lieu
of the required shrubs unless needed for a headlight screen.
                  (c)   The berm must be 18 to 40 inches above the average
grade of the street and parking lot curbs.
                  (d)   The slope of berm shall not exceed a 33% grade.
               (3)   No more than 50% of the required plant materials shall be
of the same species.
               (4)   Any permeable surface not occupied by trees, shrubs,
planting beds, signs or other permitted fixtures, or established vegetative
cover shall be planted with sod or other living ground cover.
               (5)   Parking areas shall be landscaped in addition to the
required landscaped edge. Twenty square feet of landscaping for each parking
space shall be provided along the boundary of the parking area including one
shade tree or two ornamental trees per ten parking spaces.
               (6)   All landscaped areas shall be protected by a raised six-
inch concrete curb or wheel stop.
               (7)   One shade tree or two ornamental trees per 1,000 square
feet of required landscaped area and required yards shall be provided.
            b.   Single-family detached residential and duplex landscaping
requirements.
               (1)   Two shade trees or four ornamental trees must be provided
for each dwelling.
               (2)   At least one tree must be planted in the front yard.
               (3)   Areas not used for buildings, for tree plantings, as
planting beds, or for driveways or patios must be fully sodded if sod is not
already established.
               (4)   All required trees and sod must be planted or installed
prior to request for final building inspection of the single-family detached
residential or duplex dwelling unit.
         3.   Landscape maintenance requirements.
            a.   This subsection 4.01.C.3 does not apply to single-family
detached residential dwelling units and duplex.
            b.   All plant material shall be maintained in a healthy and
growing condition and must be replaced with plant material of similar variety
and size if damaged, destroyed, or removed.
            c.   Landscaped areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds,
and other such materials or plants not a part of the landscaping.
            d.   All landscaped areas not within 100 feet of a hose bibb must
be watered with an automatic irrigation system with rain and freeze sensors.
            e.   All areas not used for buildings, planting areas, parking, or
driveway areas must remain sodded for erosion control.
            f.   Any developer desiring to install and maintain landscaping
materials and irrigation facilities within the city right-of-way must first
receive written approval from the city.
            g.   Landscaping must be in a live condition prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
         4.   Approved plant materials.
            a.   The use of artificial turf is limited to the rear yard of
buildings and is subject to the same maintenance requirement as living ground
cover.
            b.   Use of any invasive or disease-prone species is prohibited.
            c.   Table 9: Approved Plant Material List is the list of pre-
approved plant material for planting required in this subsection 4.01. An
applicant may use an alternative plant species if its use is approved in
writing by any of the following persons:
               (1)   A landscape architect registered in the State of Texas;
               (2)   A nursery professional certified by the Texas Nursery and
Landscape Association; or
               (3)   A master gardener certified by the American Horticultural
Society.
   Table 9: Approved Plant Material List
Type of Planting Common Name Botanical Name
Type of Planting Common Name                 Botanical Name
                 Caddo Maple                 Acer barbatum "Caddo"
                 Shantung Maple              Acer truncatum
                 Pecan                       Carya illinoensis
                 Shagbark Hickory            Carya ovata
                 Deodar Cedar                Cedrus deodara
                 Texas Persimmon             Diospyros virgininiana
                 Russian Olive               Eleagnus anigustifolia
                 Honey locust                Gleditsia triacanthos
                 Black Walnut                Juglans nigra
                 Eastern Black Walnut        Juglans nigra
                 Elderica Pine (Afghan Pine) Pinus eldarica
                 Eastern Red Cedar           Juniperus virginiana
                 Red Cedar                   Juniperus virginiana
                 Sweetgum                    Liguidambar styraciflua
Shade Tree       Southern Magnolia           Magnolia grandfolia
                 Chinese Pistachio           Pistacia chinensi
                 Texas Pistache              Pistacia texana
                 Bur Oak                     Quercus macrocarpa
                 Chinquapin Oak              Quercus muhlenbergii
                 Shumard Oak                 Quercus shumardi
                 Texas Red Oak               Quercus shumardi "Texana"
                 Live Oak                    Quercus virginiana
                 Western Soapberry           Sapindus drummondii
                 Bald Cypress                Taxodium distichum
                 Winged Elm                  Ulmus alata
                 American Elm                Ulmus americana
                 Cedar Elm                   Ulmus crassifolia
                 Chinese Elm                 Ulmus parvifolia
                 Lacebark Elm                Ulmus parvifolia
                 Siberian Elm                Ulmus pumila
                 River Birch                 Betula nigra
                 Red Buckeye                 Aesculus pavia var. pavia
                 Smoketree                   Cotinus coggygria
                 Wichita Blue Juniper        Juniperus scopulorum "Wichita
                                             Blue"
                 Deciduous Magnolia          Magnolia Soulangeana
                 Eve's Necklace              Sophora affinis
                 Texas Mountain Laurel       Sophora secundiflora
                 Vitex (Chastetree)          Vitex agnus-castus
                 Eastern Redbud              Cercis canadensis
                 Redbud                      Cercis canadensis
                 Desert Willow               Chilopsis linearis
                 Dogwood                     Cornus florida
                 Possumhaw Holly             Ilex decidua
Ornamental Tree  Eastern Platka Holly        Ilex opaca
                 Foster Holly                Ilex opaca #1 - #5
                 Yaupon Holly                Ilex vomitoria
                 Golden Raintree             Koelrutaria paniculata
                 Crepe Myrtle                Lagerstroernia indica
                 Flowering Crabapple         Malis Spp.
                 Wax Myrtle                  Myrica cerifera
                 Afghan (Eldarica) Pine      Pinus eldarica
                 Ornamental Plum             Prunus blireiana
                 Cherry Laurel               Prunus caroliniana
                 Purple Plum                 Prunus cerasifera
                 Mexican Plum                Prunus mexicana
                 Callery Pear                Purus calleryana
                 Flowering Pear              Purus calleryana
                 Texas Sophora               Sophora affinis
                 Chaste Tree                 Vitex agnus-castus
                 Atlas Cedar                 Cedrus atlantica "Manetti"
                 Cross Vine                  Bignonia capreolata
                 Coral Honeysuckle           Lonicera sempervirens
                 Chinese Wisteria            Wisteria sinensis
                 Deordar Cedar               Cedrus deodara
                 Crytomeria                  Cryptomeria japonica
                 Leyland Cypress             Cupressocyparis leylandi
                 NRS Holly                   Ilex aquifolium
Living Screen    Burford Holly               Ilex cornuta "burfordii"
                 Tree Form Holly             Ilex opaca AIT/Ilex perny
                 Yaupon Holly                Ilex vomitoria
                 Wax Myrtle                  Myrica cerifera
                 Mock Orange                 Philadelphus sp.
                 Fraser Photinia             Photinia xfraseri
                 Afghan (Eldarica) Pine      Pinus eldarica
                 Cherry Laurel               Prunus caroliniana
                 Vitex                       Vitex angus-castus
                 Abelia                      Abelia sp.
                 Butterfly Bush              Buddleia davidii
                 Beauty Berry                Callicarpa americana
                 False Aralia                Dizygotheca elegantissima
                 Althea/Rose of Sharon       Hibiscus syriacus
                 Oakleaf Hydrangea           Hydrangea quercifolia
                 St. John's Wort             Hypericum spp.
                 Dwarf Wax Myrtle            Myrica cerifera var. pumila
                                             (Myrica pusilla)
                 Rosemary                    Salvia rosmarinus
                 Bridal Wreath Spirea        Spiraea prunifolia
                 Anthony Waterer Spirea      Spiraea japonica "Anthony Waterer"
Shrubs           Limemound Spirea            Spiraea japonica "Limemound"
                 Bush Germander              Teucrium fruticans
                 Eastern Snowball Viburnum   Viburnum opulus "Sterile"
                 Rusty Blackhaw Viburnum     Viburnum rufidulum
                 Barberry                    Berberis sp.
                 Japanese Boxwood            Buxus sp.
                 Elaegnus                    Eldesnus sp.
                 Dwarf Yaupon                Flex vomituria "nana"
                 Chinese Holly               Ilex cornuta
                 Dwarf Burford Holly         Ilex cornuta "burfordii"
                 Autumn Sage                 Salvia greggii
                 Texas Sage                  Leucophyllum frutescens
                 Nandina                     Nandina domestica
                 Fraser Photinia             Photinia xfraseri
 
   4.02.   Screening Standards.
      A.   Purpose. Standards set forth in this subsection 4.02 establish the
screening requirements for the various land uses and zoning districts.
      B.   Applicability.
         1.   This subsection 4.02 applies to the following:
            a.   All new nonresidential use development or outside storage at
the time an application for a building permit or site plan is submitted for
approval.
            b.   All residential use development listed in subsection 4.02.C.2
below at the time of plat approval.
         2.   Properties in the Downtown Core Overlay and Downtown Transition
District are exempt from the standards of this subsection 4.02.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7839.png]
 
      C.   General requirements.
   Table 10: Screening Requirements (Section Reference)
Subsection Number Subsection Title
Subsection Number Subsection Title
4.02.C.1          Screening required between nonresidential uses and
                  residential uses
4.02.C.2          Screening required along perimeter of residential uses
4.02.C.3          Screening required between outside storage areas and other
                  uses
4.02.C.4          Responsibility for constructing the screening wall
4.02.C.5          Screening walls for loading docks
4.02.C.6          Screening wall required materials and maintenance
4.02.C.7          Mechanical equipment screening requirements for
                  nonresidential properties
4.02.C.8          Screening of outdoor waste storage
4.02.C.9          Residential fencing standards
4.02.C.10         Nonresidential fencing standards
 
         1.   Screening required between nonresidential uses and residential
uses.
            a.   A masonry screening wall is required for all new
nonresidential use developments that abut or share a property line with any SF
or MF zoning district.
            b.   The required masonry screening wall must be six feet to eight
feet in height unless otherwise specified in this subsection 4.02 or unless
approved by a planned development or specific use permit.
            c.   In lieu of screening required in this subsection 4.02, the
Zoning Administrator may waive the requirement for screening between a
nonresidential use development and a SF or MF zoning district if any of the
following conditions are present:
               (1)   An existing natural or manmade screen effectively provides
the same level of screening as an opaque wall;
               (2)   The nonresidential and residential properties are
separated by an alley; or
               (3)   If the existing screen is unbroken and generally parallel
to a creek, railroad or high-tension power line easement, or right-of-way.
         2.   Screening required along perimeter of residential uses.
            a.   A masonry screening wall is required for all single-family
detached residential, duplex, and townhome developments where the rear yard of
two or more lots abuts a roadway with a classification of collector, arterial,
or freeway.
            b.   Each section of required screening wall described in
subsection a above must be six feet to eight feet in height and utilize a
horizontal offset of at least 18 inches every 100 to 200 linear feet to allow
for a meandering sidewalk and to avoid a monolithic appearance.
            c.   The wall must be placed within a maintenance easement or
separate lot sufficient to contain the wall footings and provide at least four
feet of access room on both sides.
         3.   Screening required between outside storage areas and other uses.
A masonry screening wall is required around the perimeter of all new outside
storage areas in accordance with subsection 3.04.B.19.b.
         4.   Responsibility for constructing the screening wall.
            a.   When a new nonresidential use development or outside storage
abuts the property line of an existing development and screening is required by
this subsection 4.02, the developer of the new construction is responsible for
erecting any required screening wall adjacent to the common property line with
the existing development.
            b.   When a residential use is constructed and screening is
required, the screening must be in place before any infrastructure is accepted
by the city or before the final plat is recorded with the county.
            c.   The screening wall must be constructed along the entire shared
portion of the common property line or right-of-way line, as applicable.
            d.   The design and construction material of the screening wall
must be as specified in subsection 4.02.C.6.
         5.   Screening walls for loading docks.
            a.   Nonresidential uses with loading docks or delivery entrances
that front a collector or arterial street shall be screened by a masonry
screening wall that is a minimum six feet in height to obscure views of loading
docks and loading spaces.
            b.   Loading docks and delivery entrances within the CI,
Commercial/Industrial Flex District are exempt from the requirements of
subsection 4.02.C.5.a.
            c.   The following standards apply if service or loading dock areas
are adjacent to residential uses:
               (1)   Loading docks shall be screened with a masonry screening
wall that is a minimum of eight feet in height along the property line shared
with the residential use.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7837.png]
 
               (2)   The wall must screen the entire loading dock or space from
the residential use.
               (3)   Screening materials for walls attached to a building shall
utilize similar materials to the building's façades. Freestanding walls must
follow subsection 4.02.C.6.
         6.   Screening wall required materials and maintenance.
            a.   Any screening wall installed pursuant to this subsection 4.02
must be constructed of one or more of the following materials:
               (1)   Brick, stone, or split-face concrete masonry unit; or
               (2)   Pre-cast concrete wall or poured-in-place concrete wall or
split-face concrete masonry unit (CMU) with a similar appearance as brick or
natural stone.
            b.   All screening wall construction materials must match the
principal building on the same lot or be finished in coordinated earth-tones,
which may include red brick.
            c.   Screening walls attached to buildings must match the material,
pattern, and color of the building.
            d.   Natural or decorative variations in color or pattern are
permitted such as mottled brick or variations resulting from the use or
imitation of natural materials such as granite or limestone.
            e.   Screening walls abutting a residential use development,
whether utilized as screening between uses or screening from the right-of-way,
must be constructed with a continuous concrete footing with mow strip and
utilize a galvanized steel support hanger under each panel to prevent panel
failure or buckling.
            f.   Any wall that experiences subsidence, buckling, or other
damage resulting in the wall deflecting more than three degrees off of center
must be repaired or replaced by the owner of the property containing the wall
or the owner responsible for its construction.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7835.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7833.png]
 
         7.   Mechanical equipment screening requirements for nonresidential
properties.
            a.   General.
               (1)   In all new nonresidential use and multi-family
development, all mechanical equipment mounted on the ground or the roof and
exceeding three feet in height must be screened from view of any right-of-way
or property zoned SF.
               (2)   The location, construction, and screening of all
mechanical equipment must be shown on the site plan or design drawings
submitted for building permit review.
            b.   Ground-mounted mechanical equipment.
               (1)   Ground-mounted mechanical equipment exceeding three feet
in height must be placed behind a screening wall, vegetative screen, or
combination equal to or greater than the height of the tallest unit up to a
maximum of eight feet.
               (2)   A screening wall must be constructed of masonry materials
conforming to subsection 4.02.C.6.
            c.   Roof-mounted mechanical equipment.
               (1)   Roof-mounted mechanical equipment must be screened from
view with a parapet wall, mansard roof or alternative architectural element.
               (2)   The height of the screening element must be equal to or
greater than the height of the mechanical unit(s).
               (3)   If the mechanical unit exceeds six feet in height, an
additional roof setback for the unit shall be required at a ratio of two
horizontal feet for each additional one foot of vertical height above the
maximum six feet.
               (4)   Screening for mechanical equipment applies to new building
construction or an expansion of an existing building.
         8.   Screening of outdoor waste storage.
            a.   General.
               (1)   Waste storage areas housing refuse containers, dumpsters,
compactors, and similar facilities must be constructed in the side or rear of a
lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7831.png]
 
               (2)   Waste storage areas are prohibited within required side or
rear yard setbacks.
               (3)   Waste storage areas are prohibited within required
landscape buffers (see subsection 4.01.C.1.e).
               (4)   The location, construction and screening of all waste
storage areas must be shown on the site plan.
            b.   Screening required.
               (1)   Refuse containers, trash dumpsters, trash compactors, box
compactors, and other similar facilities must be screened on three sides with a
masonry screening wall a minimum of one foot in height above the container
height, but not exceeding eight feet in height.
               (2)   If the side of the enclosure used for access is visible
from a public right-of-way or is associated with a restaurant, it must be
screened with a rust-resistant metal gate that screens the interior of the
enclosure from view when the contents of the enclosure are not being accessed.
               (3)   The screening wall must meet the materials requirements of
subsection 4.02.C.6.
         9.   Residential fencing standards.
            a.   Fences constructed within the front yard are required to leave
at least 50% transparency regardless of materials.
            b.   Rear or side yard fences that extend along the front yard edge
of an abutting lot have the potential to block visibility from the abutting
front yard and must be set back at least ten feet from the right-of-way line
where it intersects the neighboring lot.
            c.   Prohibited materials. The following fencing materials may not
be used on a lot with a residential use:
               (1)   Corrugated metal panels;
               (2)   Plastic, not including mold-resistant vinyl;
               (3)   Any material that presents a danger to neighboring
property owners or the public, including loose nails, broken slats or exposed
nails, broken glass, or razor wire.
            d.   Location and height standards.
               (1)   Location. Fences shall be installed entirely within the
boundaries of private property or along mutual property lines and shall not
encroach upon designated rights-of-way.
               (2)   Height standards.
                  (a)   Any fence greater than six feet in height requires a
building permit.
                  (b)   Fences within the front yard are limited to three feet
at the property line.
                  (c)   A front yard fence may be constructed up to four feet
in height if every portion of the fence that exceeds three feet in height is
located outside of the sight visibility triangle shown below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7963.png]
 
Figure 9: Sight Visibility Triangle
      D.   Screening standards for manufactured housing. The requirements of
this subsection 4.02.D apply to all new or expanded mobile home parks, trailer
parks, trailer courts, or trailer subdivisions or manufactured housing.
         1.   Mobile home parks, trailer parks, trailer courts, or trailer
subdivisions are required to be screened along any public street with a
designation of freeway, arterial, or collector by an opaque screening wall at
least six feet in height and constructed of brick, stone, or concrete panel
with decorative reveals.
         2.   Individual manufactured housing units must have skirting or
screening around the entire perimeter of the unit that obscures any piers,
wheels, or other structural supporting elements as well as any plumbing
components. Unit screening shall match the exterior material, finish, and color
of the body of the unit so that the unit appears to be flush with the ground.
   4.03.   Parking Standards.
      A.   Parking dimensions and surfaces.
         1.   Purpose. The purpose of this subsection 4.03 is to ensure that
all development provides off-street parking that is adequate to prevent
congestion in the streets or adverse impacts to neighboring properties.
         2.   Applicability.
   Table 11: Parking Regulations (Section Reference)
 
Subsection Number Subsection Heading
4.03.A            Parking dimensions and surfaces
4.03.C            Loading spaces
4.03.D            Maximum parking surface area in SF Districts
4.03.E            Heavy load vehicle parking
4.03.F            RV parking in sf districts
 
            a.   This subsection 4.03 applies to all new development at the
time an application for a building permit or site plan is submitted for
approval.
            b.   All residential uses and nonresidential uses must provide
parking at the rate appearing beside the use in the Use Chart (see subsection
3.03).
            c.   Properties within the Downtown Core District (see subsection
4.06.D) are exempt from minimum off-street parking standards.
            d.   Properties within the Downtown Transition District (see
subsection 4.06.E) are required to park at one-half the rate of the minimum
parking requirements shown in the Use Chart.
            e.   Parking voluntarily provided and not required by this Zoning
Ordinance must still comply with all regulations applicable to required
parking.
         3.   Computation of parking space requirements.
            a.   Parking calculations are based on the net floor area of the
principal use.
            b.   If there is more than one principal use on the same lot,
parking is calculated based on the combined net floor area of all principal
uses.
         4.   Shared parking.
            a.   Shared parking under this subsection 4.03.A.4 must meet the
intent of this subsection 4.03 by providing adequate parking for all authorized
uses within each development subject to the shared parking agreement.
            b.   Shared parking is intended to allow uses with different peak
demands for parking to share parking spaces for the purpose of conserving land
and reducing stormwater runoff and heat island effect.
            c.   The Zoning Administrator may approve a shared parking plan
that provides for the following:
               (1)   The shared spaces will be available as long as each use is
in operation;
               (2)   The peak hours of parking demand for each use will not
coincide unless adequate parking is provided to account for periods of
overlapping peak demand;
               (3)   The applicant for a shared parking plan must submit a
technical justification for the shared parking as approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
               (4)   The spaces provided must be based on the highest combined
demand period for all uses.
               (5)   Parking spaces used under a shared parking plan must be
within 500 feet of the nearest public entrance for each use.
               (6)   The agreement must be memorialized on an instrument filed
in Johnson County Records with a copy of the filed agreement provided to the
city before issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
         5.   Parking dimensions.
            a.   Parking spaces that allow for a vehicle to overhang a curb
must measure at least nine feet wide by 18 feet deep.
            b.   Curbs and wheel stops must be designed to allow no more than
18 inches of overhang onto sidewalks and landscape buffers and islands.
            c.   Required parking spaces in both commercial and residential
developments that do not allow for a vehicle to overhang a curb (such as spaces
that abut walls or fences, two spaces that face each other, or single-family
detached residential and duplex driveway parking spaces) must measure at least
nine feet wide by 20 feet deep.
            d.   Accessible parking spaces must meet Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) standards for accessible spaces (as amended).
            e.   Sidewalks and access aisles must maintain ADA required minimum
widths at all times, regardless of whether the sidewalk or access aisle is
adjacent to an accessible parking space.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7829.png]
 
   Table 12: Minimum Dimensions by Parking Configuration
 
Angle       Stall Width Stall to Curb Stall Curb Aisle Width Curb Overhang
                                      Width
In degrees              In feet                  1 way 2 way In feet
0°/Parallel10'         10'           22'        12'   18'   0
30°        9'          17.5'         18'        12'   18'   1'
45°        9'          20'           12.5'      12'   20'   1.4'
60°        9'          20.5'         10.5'      18'   20'   1.7'
90°        9'          18'           9'         22'   24'   2'
 
         6.   Approved parking configurations are shown in Figure 20: Standard
Parking Configurations. The dimensions listed in Table 12: Minimum Dimensions
by Parking Configuration are the minimum required dimensions. Drive aisles that
function as fire lanes may require greater dimensions as determined by the Fire
Marshal.
      B.   Stacking spaces.
         1.   Purpose. Stacking spaces provide room for vehicles to queue
before receiving a service, such as services rendered by drive-thru or drive-in
uses.
         2.   Applicability.
            a.   Stacking spaces are required for all new uses listed in Table
13: Required Stacking Spaces by Use, including the conversion of an existing
building that does not require stacking space to one of the uses listed in
Table 13.
            b.   The Zoning Administrator may approve a reduction in stacking
spaces for a child care facility (day-care center) if the reduction will not
cause stacking in the public right-of-way.
         3.   General standards.
            a.   All required stacking spaces must be situated entirely outside
the right-of-way and any designated fire lane or driveway.
            b.   Stacking spaces must not overhang any sidewalk or pedestrian
path.
            c.   The minimum dimensions of a stacking space are nine feet by 18
feet with a vertical clearance of at least ten feet.
   Table 13: Required Stacking Spaces by Use
 
Approved Land Use                    Minimum Required Stacking Spaces
Bank or financial institution        2 spaces per lane
Restaurant or cafeteria, with drive- 6 spaces from pick up window (min. 4
thru                                 from order point if different from pick
                                     up window)
Drive-thru or drive-in uses          3 spaces per window
Car wash, full service               3 spaces per wash bay
School, K-12                         1 space per 10 students
 
            d.   Surface material.
               (1)   All areas within the city that are used for the parking of
motor vehicles, including access driveways and stacking spaces, shall be paved
with impervious surface materials and shall be constructed with reinforced
concrete or asphalt.
               (2)   Areas used for emergency access, as fire lanes, or as
loading spaces must be capable of supporting 75,000 pounds or the minimum
specified in the city's adopted fire code.
            e.   Parking lot maintenance.
               (1)   Each owner of property developed as nonresidential use or
residential use, including property used as parking (principal use), is
responsible for maintaining the condition of all parking areas on the property,
regardless of whether the parking areas are accessible to the public.
               (2)   Maintenance includes repairing of potholes and pavement
failures, repairs to prevent ponding or standing water, sealing cracks and
joint failures, and removal of trash and weeds.
               (3)   Parking areas other than those used for single-family
detached residential and duplex must maintain contrasting striping marking the
boundaries of each parking space.
            f.   Parking for new and unlisted uses. The Zoning Administrator
will determine the parking rate that applies to any use not listed in the Use
Chart (see subsection 3.02 Classification of New and Unlisted Uses).
            g.   Relief from parking requirements. The City Council may approve
up to a 20% reduction in parking requirements if the Council finds that the
reduction will not cause or increase congestion in the public right-of-way or
negatively impact adjacent property owners.
      C.   Loading spaces.
         1.   Each loading space must be a minimum of ten feet wide by 25 feet
long and must have a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.
         2.   Loading spaces are required according to Table 14: Required
Loading Spaces by Floor Area.
   Table 14: Required Loading Spaces by Floor Area
 
Building Floor Area           Required Loading Spaces
0 to 10,000 sq. ft.           0
Over 10,000 to 50,000 sq. ft. 1
Over 50,000 sq. ft.           2 plus 1 space per additional 100,000 square feet
                              of floor area
 
         3.   Loading spaces may not be located within 20 feet of any property
zoned SF or MF.
         4.   No loading space shall be situated within a fire lane.
         5.   Nonconforming uses permitted to continue must provide off-street
loading spaces with access and maneuvering space adequate to prevent loading
and unloading within the street.
      D.   Maximum parking surface area in SF Districts.
         1.   Any property with a garage must have a paved driveway leading
from the street to the garage that is equivalent in width to the garage
openings. The driveway may be reduced in width to eight feet at the right-of-
way line.
         2.   The total paved area of a driveway providing access to a property
zoned SF may not consume more than 50% of the front yard.
         3.   In addition to driveway width required in subsection 4.03.D,
properties zoned SF are allowed one additional parking space measuring no more
than eight feet in width. The additional space must utilize the same surface as
the existing driveway.
         4.   The Zoning Administrator may approve a continuous circular
driveway if it meets the following conditions:
            a.   The driveway connects directly to a street in two locations,
and covers no more than 65% of the front yard; and
            b.   The width of the circular driveway does not exceed 50% of the
minimum front yard setback.
         5.   If a deed restriction or private covenant imposes different
standards for driveway layout or coverage than those established in this
subsection , the stricter standard is deemed controlling.
      E.   Heavy load vehicle parking.
         1.   Other than the parking of recreation vehicles on lots developed
as detached single-family use over 10,000 square feet (see subsection 4.03.F),
heavy load vehicles are prohibited from parking in any district zoned SF, MF,
MU, NC, LC, RC, or any PD with the same or similar underlying districts.
         2.   This restriction does not apply to heavy load vehicles that are
conducting a delivery of products or goods to a property zoned MU or C or
utilizing loadings spaces in accordance with subsection 4.03.C. Loading and
unloading is prohibited within the public right-of-way.
         3.   Heavy load vehicles are prohibited within SF and MF districts
except when used for moving or delivery of household items, such as moving
trucks and vans and appliance delivery.
      F.   RV parking in SF Districts.
         1.   Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to recognize that
recreational vehicles (RVs) are generally incompatible with the scale and use
of detached single-family residential properties and, if not properly screened
from view and maintained, have the potential to cause adverse impacts on
adjacent properties, including but not limited to the following:
            a.   By reducing the area that can be used for parking personal
automobiles and light trucks, thereby forcing those vehicles to encroach over
the sidewalk or park in the street;
            b.   By damaging ground surfaces and causing standing water during
rain events; and
            c.   By creating a visual nuisance that diminishes property values
when the RV is not properly stored, maintained, and protected from the
elements.
         2.   Conditions for parking or storing RVs in SF Districts. Parking or
storage of any RV, whether a trailer or self-propelled that qualifies as a
heavy load vehicle or exceeds 26 feet or 16,000 pounds gross vehicle weight
rating (GVWR) is prohibited in an SF District unless the RV is parked or stored
in conformance with this subsection 4.03.F.
            a.   The property on which the RV is stored must be a minimum of
10,000 square feet in size.
            b.   No more than one RV is allowed on a lot.
            c.   When not being prepared for use or storage, the RV must remain
parked on a concrete or asphalt pad capable of withstanding both the static and
live load of the RV.
            d.   The parking pad and the RV must be located according to the
following:
               (1)   At least 35 feet from the front right-of-way line or
behind the rearmost portion of the front-facing façade of the house;
               (2)   At least 20 feet from the side right-of-way line on a
corner lot;
               (3)   At least seven feet from any abutting side or rear lot
line shared with a property zoned SF;
               (4)   Trees and overhead powerlines must be maintained to avoid
touching the top of the RV.
            e.   Any carport or structure used to cover or enclose the RV must
maintain the same setbacks listed for a parking pad and may not exceed the
maximum height allowed for an accessory building.
            f.   A carport or structure used to cover or enclose an RV is
considered an accessory building for the purpose of calculating lot coverage
and maximum square footage of accessory buildings under subsection 3.08.
   4.04.   Lighting Standards.
      A.   Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to:
         1.   Reduce the problems created by improperly designed and installed
outdoor lighting;
         2.   Reduce problems of glare on operators of motor vehicles,
pedestrians and land uses;
         3.   Minimize light trespass;
         4.   Reduce the energy and financial costs of outdoor lighting by
establishing regulations limiting the area that certain kinds of outdoor
lighting fixtures can illuminate; and
         5.   Preserve the night sky as a natural resource.
      B.   Applicability.
         1.   This subsection 4.04 to all new lighting fixtures or replacement
of existing lighting fixtures except those exempted in subsection 4.04.D.
         2.   The Building Official may require that an applicant submit
evidence that lighting installed per an approved building permit complies with
this subsection.
         3.   Upon receiving a complaint related to lighting performance under
this subsection, the Building Official or other authorized agent of the city
may use any lawful means to measure light output from the source of the fixture
or fixtures that are the subject of the complaint. If light output is found to
exceed that authorized in this subsection, the Building Official or other
authorized agent of the city may issue notice to abate to the owner of the
property containing the fixture in question.
      C.   General requirements. The following standards shall apply to all
exterior lighting except public street lighting and other lighting that is
specifically exempted by this subsection 4.04.
         1.   Buffer areas and required setback areas. Light sources or
luminaires within buffer areas (see subsection 4.01.C.1.b and subsection
4.01.C.1.e), within required setback yard areas (see subsection 2.05
Dimensional Standards Table), and on pedestrian walkways and hike and bike
trails must be full-cutoff type fixtures (see Figure 21: Lighting Fixture
Types).
         2.   Shielded light source required.
            a.   All luminaires located on properties that are nonresidential
use must be designed to completely shield bulbs from direct view of at a point
three feet above grade on the lot line abutting a residential use property.
            b.   See Figure 21: Lighting Fixture Types for examples.
         3.   Light trespass limitation. All luminaires located on private
property must be designed or positioned to achieve the following:
            a.   The maximum illumination at any common property line with an
SF zoned property does not exceed one-quarter foot-candle; and
            b.   The maximum illumination does not exceed one-half foot-candle
adjacent to a street right-of-way.
         4.   Canopy lighting.
            a.   Lighting recessed for canopies covering gasoline or diesel
passenger vehicle filling or service stations, gasoline or diesel truck filling
or service station, and drive-thru or drive-in uses must be directed so that it
does not illuminate abutting properties.
            b.   Luminaires and bulbs used in canopies that are accessory to
the uses in subsection 4.04.C.4 must be completely shielded from direct view at
a point five feet above the ground as measured at the property line or a street
right-of-way.
         5.   Wall or roof lighting.
            a.   Wall or roof lighting in districts other than SF may be used
to illuminate pedestrian walkways, entrance areas and yard areas within 30 feet
of the building envelope.
            b.   Wall lighting must be angled to avoid glare as seen from
abutting properties or the public right-of-way.
            c.   For lighting in SF Districts, see subsection 4.04.D.2.
         6.   Open area used for motor vehicle parking, storage, or access.
            a.   Any open area used for motor vehicle parking, storage, or
access may be illuminated with freestanding luminaires.
            b.   Freestanding luminaires are permitted to be a maximum of 30
feet in height.
            c.   When a luminary is located within 100 feet of a property zoned
SF or MF the maximum permitted luminaires height shall be 20 feet.
            d.   All luminaires must have a cutoff angle equal to or less than
90 degrees (see Figure 21: Lighting Fixture Types).
            e.   The use of exterior lighting with a cutoff angle greater than
90 degrees is permitted only when the Building Official finds the following:
               (1)   That the proposed lighting is not in conflict with the
stated purpose;
               (2)   That the proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or
restrict public health, safety and welfare or create a nuisance; and
               (3)   The proposed lighting will not result in an impairment of
vision creating a hazard for vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7841.png]
 
         7.   Signs. Externally illuminated signs, advertising displays,
building identification, and monument signs must comply with §
156.35 of the Code of Ordinances.
         8.   Buildings, architectural features, flags, and monuments. Building
façades, architectural features of buildings, flags, and monuments may be
illuminated under the following conditions:
            a.   Fixtures are equipped with shields and are located in a way
that limits the fixture's direct light distribution to the façade or feature
being illuminated;
            b.   The configuration of the light installation blocks all direct
light from the fixture as viewed from any other property; and
            c.   The maximum luminance of any surface does not exceed the foot-
candles specified in Table 15: Maximum Illumination between Properties.
         9.   Prohibited fixtures.
            a.   "Cobra head" type lighting fixtures having dished or "drop"
lenses or refractors shall be prohibited.
            b.   Flickering or flashing lights shall be prohibited.
         10.   Illumination.
            a.   Intensity of illumination.
               (1)   The intensity of illumination projected from one property
across an abutting property line shall not exceed the intensity shown for the
zoning district of the abutting property in Table 15: Maximum Illumination
between Properties.
               (2)   Any overlay district shown in Table 15: Maximum
Illumination Between Properties determines the maximum allowable intensity of
illumination at the property line for all properties within the overlay. If an
overlay is not listed, the underlying zoning district determines the allowable
intensity.
   Table 15: Maximum Illumination Between Properties
 
Underlying Zoning of Adjacent    Foot-Candles Horizontal Foot-Candles Vertical
Property
A, Agricultural District
SF-6, Single-Family Dwelling
District
SF-7, Single-Family Dwelling
District                         0.2                     0.5
SF-10, Single-Family Dwelling
District
SF-20, Single-Family Dwelling
District
MF-1, Medium-Density Residential
District                         0.5                     0.5
MF-2, High-Density Residential
District
NC, Neighborhood Commercial
District
LC, Local Commercial District
RC, Regional Commercial District
MU, Mixed Use District           3.0                     3.0
CI, Commercial/Industrial Flex
District
At the boundary of right-of-way
or streets
CS, Cleburne Station Overlay
DTC, Downtown Core Overlay       5.0                     5.0
I, Industrial District
 
            b.   Maximum outdoor illumination level. The maximum computed or
measured outdoor illumination level on a property shall not exceed 20 foot-
candles outdoors at any point, except that lighting under canopies (such as for
service stations) shall not exceed 30 foot-candles.
            c.   Measurement of illumination.
               (1)   Meter required.
                  (a)   Lighting levels of outdoor lighting shall be measured
in foot-candles with a direct-reading portable light meter with a color and
cosine corrected sensor with multiple scales.
                  (b)   Reading accuracy should be within plus or minus 5%.
                  (c)   The meter shall be tested and calibrated by an
independent commercial photometric laboratory or manufacturer within one year
of date of use as attested to by a certificate issued by such laboratory.
               (2)   Horizontal method of measurement.
                  (a)   The meter sensor shall be mounted not more than six
inches above ground level in a horizontal position.
                  (b)   Readings shall be taken only after the cell has been
exposed to provide a constant reading.
                  (c)   Measurements shall be made when the meteorological
optical range is six miles or further so that measurements will not be
adversely affected by atmospheric scatter.
                  (d)   Measurements shall be made after dark with the existing
questioned light sources on, then with the same sources off.
                  (e)   This procedure eliminates the effects of moonlight and
other ambient light.
                  (f)   The difference between the two readings shall be
compared to the foot-candle ratings listed in subsection 4.04.C.10.
               (3)   Vertical method of measurement.
                  (a)   The meter sensor shall be mounted at five feet above
ground level in a vertical position, perpendicular to the property line and
facing the outdoor lighting in question.
                  (b)   Readings shall be taken only after the cell has been
exposed to provide a constant reading. Measurements shall be made after dark
with the existing questioned light sources on, then with the same sources off.
                  (c)   This procedure eliminates the effects of moonlight and
other ambient light.
                  (d)   The difference between the two readings shall be
compared to the foot-candle ratings listed in subsection 4.04.C.10.
      D.   Exemptions. The following are exempt from the standards contained in
this subsection 4.04:
         1.   Decorative seasonal lighting.
         2.   Residential use dwellings.
            a.   Decorative or entryway lighting. The maximum lighting level at
the property line may exceed the maximum shown in Table 15 if the luminaire
meets one or both of the following:
               (1)   Individual lamps have a luminosity of less than 300
lumens; or
               (2)   A cutoff component is incorporated into the design of the
luminaire that prevents the bulb from being viewed from the property line or
the right-of-way.
            b.   Security lighting or floodlighting. The maximum lighting level
at the property line may exceed the maximum shown in Table 15 if the luminaire
meets all of the following:
               (1)   The lamp is automatically activated and deactivated by a
motion sensor;
               (2)   The lamp is not on for a continuous period of more than
ten minutes before automatically deactivating; and
               (3)   Lighting produced by the luminaire does not exceed 2,500
lumens.
         3.   Temporary emergency lighting. Temporary emergency lighting used
by police, fire fighters, or other emergency services, as well as all vehicular
luminaires.
         4.   Hazard warnings. Hazard warning luminaires pursuant to exercise
of federal and state regulatory authority.
         5.   Recreational uses.
            a.   Because of its unique requirement for nighttime visibility and
their limited hours of operations, a play field or stadium is exempted from the
general standards of this subsection 4.04.
            b.   Lighting for a play field or stadium must be shielded to
minimize light and glare from visible from a property zoned SF or MF.
            c.   If the illuminance caused by the play field or stadium will
exceed the maximum allowed in Table 15: Maximum Illumination Between Properties
at the property line shared with the property zoned SF or MF, the applicant for
the play field or stadium must plant a continuous living screen reaching ten
feet in height at maturity along any property line shared with a property zoned
SF or MF.
         6.   Public street or sidewalk projects. The city may vary from the
requirements of this subsection 4.04 as part of the approval of public street
or sidewalk projects.
   4.05.   Design Standards.
Table 16: Design Standards (Subsection References)
 
Subsection Number Subsection Title
4.05.A            Exterior building features, finishes, and design
4.05.B            Residential use design requirements
4.05.C            Building height and design for single-family and duplex
                  adjacency
4.05.D            Nonresidential use design requirements
 
 
      A.   Exterior building features, finishes, and design.
         1.   Purpose and intent.
            a.   The purpose of establishing standards for building appearance
and design is to protect the value of existing properties by ensuring that all
new or reconstructed buildings are designed and built to minimum standards of
quality and appearance.
            b.   This subsection 4.05 is not intended to dictate the design or
architectural style of any building or to unreasonably or capriciously add to
the cost of construction.
            c.   Where questions of interpretation of this subsection 4.05
arise, the Zoning Administrator will interpret this subsection in a manner
consistent with state statute.
         2.   Applicability.
            a.   This subsection 4.05.A applies to all principal buildings or
principal uses located outside of an overlay listed in this subsection 4.05.A.
            b.   If the use is exempted from the overlay standards, this
subsection 4.05.A applies.
            c.   The city may require execution of a development agreement
between the developer and the city if the developer requests exceptions to the
requirements of this subsection 4.05.A.
         3.   Definition of materials. As used in this subsection 4.05.A, the
following terms have the meaning assigned below:
            a.   Class 1 building materials.
               (1)   Brick or stone stacked and mortared in place (stone means
granite, limestone, marble, or other naturally-occurring stone);
               (2)   Glazed ceramic or porcelain tile;
               (3)   Stucco consisting of exterior Portland cement, hand-
applied in three coats to a minimum thickness of three-quarters of an inch;
               (4)   Concrete tilt-wall or other concrete finish technique up
to 80% of a building's overall façade;
               (5)   Fiber cement panel or board (such as "Hardie" board).
            b.   Class 2 building materials.
               (1)   Synthetic stucco or EIFS (Exterior Insulation and Finish
Systems);
               (2)   Concrete masonry unit (CMU) with split-faced finish and
embedded or natural color derived from exposed aggregate;
               (3)   Treated and weatherproofed architectural metal siding or
panel including painted steel, aluminum, cast iron, bronze, and copper;
               (4)   Treated and weatherproofed wood siding or panel;
               (5)   Applied brick or stone;
               (6)   Structural curtain wall or storefront glass system.
            c.   Materials not included. Any material not explicitly listed
above is not considered a Class 1 or Class 2 building material including, but
not limited to, the following:
               (1)   Masonite siding;
               (2)   Unfinished or unsealed wood siding or panel;
               (3)   Unfinished or bare galvanized metal siding or panel;
               (4)   Smooth-faced or painted CMU block;
               (5)   Standard roof covering materials or roof shingles, except
as used in a mansard roof.
            d.   Standard windows and doors. The percentage of building
material coverage applied in this subsection 4.05 excludes doors and standard,
non-structural windows (e.g., windows that are not curtain wall or storefront
windows).
      B.   Residential use design requirements.
         1.   Single-family detached residential and duplex required building
materials.
            a.   All single-family detached residential and duplex dwellings
shall consist of at least 70% Class 1 building materials based on the total
exterior surface of all façades.
            b.   The remainder of the exterior surface shall consist of Class 2
building materials.
            c.   The minimum required roof pitch above any garage or
conditioned space is 2:12.
            d.   Repeated or reversed elevations within any cluster of four or
fewer houses (i.e., "cookie cutter" approach) are prohibited.
         2.   Garage orientation options.
            a.   In addition to the minimum parking spaces required in
subsection 3.03 Use Chart, all single-family detached residential and duplex
uses are required to provide at least two fully enclosed garage spaces per unit
that generally conform to one of the following configurations:
               (1)   Front entry orientation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7851.png]
 
               (2)   Side entry configuration. In instances where a corner lot
utilizes a side entry garage configuration from the exterior (street) yard, the
Zoning Administrator may authorize a reduction of the interior side yard
setback by no more than two feet in order to accommodate the minimum parking
dimension required in subsection 4.03.A.5.c. In no instance shall a single-
family detached unit or duplex interior side yard setback be reduced below five
feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7849.png]
 
               (3)   Rear or detached configuration.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7847.png]
 
            b.   Additional garage design standards.
               (1)   Garages that face or are visible from the street must
provide a row of windows along the upper half of the door or a stained or
painted finish that complements the colors, materials, and trim used on the
house.
               (2)   Front-facing garages such as those shown in Figure 22:
Front Entry Garage Types must provide a minimum of 24 linear feet of driveway
between the face of the garage and the right-of-way line to prevent vehicles
from overhanging an existing or future sidewalk.
               (3)   The minimum width of driveway leading to a front entry
garage must equal the width of the garage opening.
               (4)   A driveway leading to garage types other than front entry
garages must provide a minimum of ten feet of width between the right-of-way
line and where the driveway curves toward the garage as shown in Figure 25:
Required Vehicle Maneuvering Area.
               (5)   Garages that are oriented perpendicular to the street must
conform to the dimensions shown in Figure 25: Required Vehicle Maneuvering
Area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7845.png]
 
         3.   Allowance for carports in single-family detached residential or
duplex areas. Single-family detached residential or duplex dwellings may be
granted an exception to the requirement to provide enclosed parking spaces, and
may construct a carport of equivalent size to cover up to two vehicles on a 12
feet by 24 feet concrete or asphalt parking pad under the following conditions:
            a.   More than 50% of single-family detached residential or duplex
houses on the same block do not have enclosed garages;
            b.   The parking pad is connected to the street by a paved
driveway;
            c.   The entire carport is at least five feet from any right-of-way
line, other than eave projection of up to 12 inches;
            d.   The height of the carport does not exceed the maximum
allowable height per the applicable zoning district, with an opening no less
than eight feet in height to allow for vehicle access; and
            e.   The carport is either:
               (1)   Sited completely behind the front face of the principal
building; or
               (2)   Finished in materials and colors that match the principal
building.
         4.   Single-family detached residential and duplex design feature
elements. Every single-family detached residential and duplex dwelling unit
must provide at least five of the following elements on each primary façade or
any front façade as specified:
            a.   Front wall articulation providing an offset of at least 10% of
the wall height every 15 linear feet;
            b.   One hundred percent Class 1 building materials on any side of
the dwelling visible from a public or private street;
            c.   Use of decorative window features such as raised muntins or
colored glass (not painted or laminated) on at least 50% of front façade
windows;
            d.   Upgraded driveway surface (i.e., salt finish, exposed
aggregate, brick or stone paver, concrete with stain mixed in (not applied),
permeable concrete or pavers, or similar);
            e.   Architectural focal point such as a chimney, tower, window
pattern (must utilize windows covering 10% or more of the front or side
elevation);
            f.   Supportive or structural columns (not pilasters) measuring at
least six inches in width and extending at least eight feet in height on the
same elevation;
            g.   One or more bay windows measuring at least 40 square feet each
in total window surface;
            h.   Stone accent covering at least 20% of one or more elevations;
            i.   Covered front or side porch at least eight feet in depth and
extending at least 25% of the length of the front façade;
            j.   Full-width window shutters on two or more windows, provided
shutters are made of treated or painted cedar or cementitious fiber;
            k.   Eight-foot height front door;
            l.   Double front doors;
            m.   Arched entryway with molded accent in a contrasting color;
            n.   Two or more dormer windows on a second floor;
            o.   Three or more decorative brackets on one elevation;
            p.   Upgraded roof material, such as barrel tile;
            q.   Window side lights on one or both sides of the front door and
extending at least half the height of the door;
            r.   At least two accent lighting fixtures;
            s.   Increase in landscaping in the front or side yard equaling at
least 50% more than the minimum required;
            t.   Roof eaves extending more than eight inches on all primary
roof surfaces;
            u.   One or more exposed rafter tails extending at least four
inches from the front façade of the house;
            v.   Decorative banding or molding along 75% or more of the front
and sides of a dwelling;
            w.   Soldier course or row lock along all windows and garage doors
on one or more elevations;
            x.   Side or rear entry garage where the face of the garage is
located entirely behind the front plane of the house;
            y.   Decorative brick pattern (i.e., herringbone, basketweave)
covering 15% or more of the front façade;
            z.   Corner features, projections, or contrasting quoins on all
street-facing elevations;
            aa.   Transom window over a front entryway extending the width of
the front door and any sidelights on one or both sides of the front door.
         5.   Alternative compliance for single-family and duplex design
requirements. A request for alternative compliance may be submitted and acted
upon in accordance with subsection 5.03 Alternative Compliance. The Zoning
Administrator may approve alternative design feature elements or a roof pitch
that is less than the required minimum for one single-family lot, based upon
finding that the proposed alternative meets the following:
            a.   The alternative design feature is, at a minimum, equivalent to
and meets the spirit and intent of subsection 4.05 Design Standards:
            b.   The one-lot development is not being developed in conjunction
with a new subdivision; and
            c.   Any alternatives will, in the determination of the Zoning
Administrator, produce a similar or greater level of quality than the elements
required by subsection 4.05 Design Standards.
         6.   Multi-family required building materials.
            a.   All multi-family buildings shall consist of at least 80% Class
1 building materials based on the total exterior surface of all façades.
            b.   The remainder of the exterior surface shall consist of Class 2
building materials.
         7.   Multi-family required design elements.
            a.   All multi-family buildings are required to conceal stairwells
and corridors internally within the exterior building façade.
            b.   At least 25% of required parking for multi-family buildings
must be covered by an enclosed garage or carport constructed of materials
similar to the principal building.
            c.   All multi-family buildings must provide at least three of the
following features for buildings with eight or fewer dwellings and five of the
following features for buildings with more than eight units:
               (1)   Balconies with at least four feet of depth on all units.
               (2)   Covered parking located behind the building.
               (3)   Additional landscaping covering at least 5% of the gross
lot acreage.
               (4)   Twenty percent stone accent.
               (5)   Primary façade articulation providing an offset of at
least 10% of the wall height every 15 linear feet.
               (6)   Roof cornice projections of at least three feet on all
primary façades.
               (7)   Private yards measuring at least 50 square feet on all
ground floor units.
               (8)   Corner elements such as towers, rounded edges, contrasting
materials or colors on at least two building corners.
               (9)   First floor walkouts providing direct access to units from
the street.
         8.   Residential open space requirements.
            a.   A residential use that consists of 100 or more units,
dwellings, or lots must dedicate one acre of open space per 60 units and must
create homeowners' or property owners' association to maintain the open space
prior to recording the final plat.
            b.   The calculation of open space is prorated to the number of
units, dwellings, or lots (e.g., if a development contains 100 lots, the
required open space is 100 x .0167 = 1.67 acres; if a development contains 175
lots, the required open space is 175 x .0167 = 2.92 acres).
            c.   If privately owned open space is not proposed for the
residential development, the developer may request to dedicate parkland or pay
a fee-in-lieu of parkland as outlined in subsection 4.05.B.9.f.
            d.   Privately owned open space must contain at least five features
from the following list, including at least one feature from each category and
make all features available to every unit in the development or subdivision:
               (1)   Passive recreation features.
                  (a)   A minimum of one linear mile of trail six feet or
greater in width that does not loop, provided each end is accessible to a
street, or a minimum of one half mile of trail that does loop and consists of a
concrete or decomposed granite surface with at least one seating area and trash
receptacle every 1,000 feet (see Figure 26);
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7843.png]
 
                  (b)   A permanent water feature or amenity consisting of a
retention pond, lake, lagoon, fishing pier, boat dock, or similar feature;
                  (c)   Open lawn consisting of generally flat and
uninterrupted terrain;
                  (d)   Preservation of at least 25% of the existing tree
canopy.
               (2)   Active recreation features.
                  (a)   A swimming pool with a minimum depth of four feet;
                  (b)   A clubhouse providing an indoor workout and fitness
facility or lounge area;
                  (c)   Outdoor recreation features such as golf, frisbee golf,
volleyball court, basketball court, grills, and picnic areas;
                  (d)   Playground with equipment accessible to children of all
abilities;
                  (e)   Large and small dog parks with pet watering stations.
            e.   Criteria for amenity construction.
               (1)   Areas reserved for common amenities must be shown on the
preliminary and final plat for each phase of a subdivision as a common area
lot.
               (2)   At a minimum, one acre of amenities must be constructed
with the first residential phase (e.g., if a development or subdivision
consists of 250 lots at ultimate buildout according to the preliminary plat,
and phase one consists of 75 lots, phase one requires one acre of amenities;
all remaining phases may provide open space prorated to one acre per 60 units.)
               (3)   The first phase must contain at least three of the five
amenities required per subsection 4.05.B.9.d. Remaining phases are required
only to supply the remaining amenities but may also provide additional
amenities from those provided in the first phase.
               (4)   If open space amenities are constructed in an area that is
not contiguous with the associated residential area, the recreational area must
be directly connected to the residential area by a paved street.
               (5)   All facilities must be completed or bonded for completion
for each phase before acceptance of the subdivision. The city is not
responsible for constructing or completing construction of any amenities
required in this subsection except as provided by an ordinance of the city or
by a development agreement approved by City Council.
            f.   Parkland or fee-in-lieu of parkland dedication.
               (1)   Property already zoned or subject to zoning request other
than PD. The city may, at the discretion of the City Council and upon
recommendation by the Parks Board, credit fee-in-lieu of privately owned open
space required by subsection 4.05.B.9.a to the Subdivider in accordance with
the following:
                  (a)   The fee-in-lieu is consistent with the amount adopted
by the City Council and required by the Parks and Open Space Design Features
and Dedication Requirements Ordinance or its successor ordinances; and
                  (b)   The subdivision will be adequately served by a
publicly-owned park in a manner consistent with the intent of this subsection
4.05.B.9.
                  (c)   The applicant for approval of a subdivision in a
property not zoned PD may not request a waiver from the requirement to provide
open space, to establish a homeowners' or property owners' association to
maintain private open space, or to pay fee-in-lieu of privately owned open
space.
               (2)   PD-zoned property.
                  (a)   The city may, at the discretion of the City Council and
upon recommendation by the Parks Board, credit fee-in-lieu of privately owned
open space required by subsection 4.05.B.9.a to the subdivider in accordance
with the following:
                     (i)   The fee-in-lieu is consistent with the amount
adopted by the City Council and required by the Parks and Open Space Design
Features and Dedication Requirements Ordinance or its successor ordinances; and
                     (ii)   The subdivision will be adequately served by a
publicly owned park in a manner consistent with the intent of this subsection
4.05.B.9.
                  (b)   The applicant for approval of a subdivision in a
property zoned PD or proposed for PD zoning may request, and the City Council
may grant at its sole discretion upon recommendation by the Parks Board, a
waiver from the requirement to provide open space, to establish a homeowners'
or property owners' association to maintain private open space, or to pay fee-
in-lieu of privately owned open space.
      C.   Building height and design for single-family and duplex adjacency.
         1.   Applicability. This subsection 4.05.C applies to all new non-
residential and multi-family buildings when abutting single-family or duplex
residences, or if 50% or more of the existing buildings on the same block are
either single-family or duplex residences.
            a.   For the purpose of administering this subsection 4.05.C, the
50% threshold described in 4.05.C.1 above is exceeded when the collective total
of buildings on both sides of the same street and block that are constructed as
single-family or duplex residences exceeds 50% of the total number of lots or
separate tracts that front each side of the same street.
            b.   A tract as described in 4.05.C.1.a above is an unplatted
property that has either been developed or is of sufficient size to be platted
for development under the requirements of the applicable zoning district.
         2.   Building height and design.
            a.   All non-residential and multi-family buildings meeting the
criteria of section 4.05.C.1 above shall be subject to one of the following
limitations when adjacent to single-family or duplex residences:
               (1)   A proposed non-residential or multi-family building that
does not exceed the maximum height allowed in an SF or D District may be
constructed to the applicable setback line that is established for the zoning
district in which the proposed non-residential or multi-family building is
located; or
               (2)    If the proposed non- resident ial or mult i-family buil
ding exce eds the maxi mum heig ht allo wed in an SF or D Dist rict, the non-
residential or multi-family building shall be constructed entirely within and
below a height proximity slope of 1:3 (vertical rise to horizontal run), as
measured from the residential property line (see Figure 27: Height Proximity
Slope).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7943.png]
 
 
            b.   All non-residential and multi-family buildings constructed
under subsection 4.05.C.2.a(1) above shall feature a building design that is
complementary to the nearest single-family or duplex residence on the same side
of the street for the purpose of conforming to the context of the existing
neighborhood.
            c.   A minimum of three complementary design features are required
for all non-residential and multi-family buildings constructed under subsection
4.05.C.2.b and shall include, but not be limited to, features that are
complementary to and harmonious with the exterior finishing materials, roof
pitch, door placement, architectural features, and window pattern of the
adjacent single-family or duplex residence.
               (1)   Non-residential and multi-family buildings located within
the Downtown Transition Overlay shall follow the design standards in subsection
4.06.E.2.f, regardless of the construction of abutting buildings. However, when
constructed adjacent to single-family residential or duplex buildings, non-
residential and multi-family buildings in the Downtown Transition Overlay shall
still meet the height limitations of this subsection 4.05.C.
               (2)   The Zoning Administrator may approve one or more
alternative design features not listed in subsection 4.05.C.2.c if the
requested building design feature produces the same or greater level of design
quality. The Zoning Administrator may refuse to approve a requested design and
defer to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval or denial. If the
Planning and Zoning Commission denies the requested design, the applicant may
appeal to the City Council within ten days of the Commission's decision. The
decision of the City Council is final.
            d.   No balcony on a non-residential and multi-family building
constructed under this subsection 4.05.C shall be permitted to face a single-
family or duplex residence, unless the building is constructed within and below
the height proximity slope as described in subsection 4.05.C.2.a.2 above.
      D.   Nonresidential use design requirements.
         1.   Applicability. This subsection 4.05.D (Nonresidential Use Design
Requirements) applies to every façade of a nonresidential use building with the
following exceptions:
            a.   A building façade that directly faces a railway and railway
right-of-way;
            b.   A building façade that directly faces an area that is not
accessible to the public or visible from any abutting property from a point
measured six feet from the ground at the property line; and
            c.   Existing buildings unless they are reconstructed or expanded,
in which case the area of the reconstruction or expansion is required to
conform to this subsection 4.05.D (Nonresidential Use Design Requirements).
         2.   Nonresidential building materials.
            a.   Nonresidential use building façades shall consist of at least
80% Class 1 building materials based on the total exterior surface of all
façades except those listed in 1 above.
            b.   The remainder of all building façades, except those listed in
4.05.D.1, shall consist of Class 2 building materials.
         3.   Nonresidential building orientation. Any building visible from a
public right-of-way shall either face the right-of-way or design any façade
that faces a right-of-way with the same quality of design and level of detail
as the primary façade or building entrance.
         4.   Properties zoned I, Industrial District.
            a.   Buildings constructed in the I District are required to meet
this subsection 4.05.D (Nonresidential Use Design Requirements) on the primary
façade only.
            b.   Buildings in the I District that are outside of an overlay are
not subject to window requirements in subsection 4.05.D.5.
            c.   For the purposes of complying with subsection 4.05.D.6,
buildings in the I District may deduct one item from Table 17: Menu of
Nonresidential Design Elements based on the building size as indicated in Table
18: Required Minimum Number of Design Elements.
         5.   Required windows.
            a.   Primary façades must have windows or doors containing glass
that cover a minimum of 20% and a maximum of 80% of the façade.
            b.   Secondary façades must have windows or doors containing glass
that cover a minimum of 10% and a maximum of 80% of the façade.
            c.   Of the required glass area, at least 50% must be transparent
(not opaque or spandrel glazing).
            d.   No façade shall exceed 80% glass coverage.
         6.   Nonresidential design elements requirements.
            a.    Table 17: Menu of Nonresidential Design Elements includes a
list of design elements that, based upon the size of a building (see Table 18:
Required Minimum Number of Design Element), must be incorporated into a
building's design on any building façade visible from a right-of-way, public
parking lot, or abutting property:
   Table 17: Menu of Nonresidential Design Elements
 
Canopies, Awnings, or Porticos Outdoor Patios
Overhangs                      Display windows
Recesses or projections        Architectural details, such as tile work or
                               moldings, integrated into the building façade
Arcades or colonnades          Integrated planters or wing walls that
                               incorporate landscape and sitting areas
Peaked roof forms              Offsets, reveals or projecting ribs used to
                               express articulation
Arches                         Cornices projecting from the building face
 
            b.    A building's floor area determines the minimum number of
required design elements (See Table 18):
   Table 18: Required Minimum Number of Design Elements
 
Building Square Footage   Minimum Number of Design Elements
0 to 20,000 sq. ft.       2
20,001 to 50,000 sq. ft.  3
50,001 to 100,000 sq. ft. 5
Over 100,001 sq. ft.      7
 
         7.   Nonresidential front façade entry requirements.
            a.   A front building entry must utilize a distinctive entry
presence, emphasizing the building's entry point along the façade with the use
of materials, towers, arches, articulation, or accent windows.
            b.   Each building entry accessible by the public must be sheltered
from the elements using recesses or awnings.
   4.06.   Overlay Regulations.
      A.   CS, Cleburne Station Overlay standards.
         1.   Purpose.
            a.   Cleburne Station is envisioned as a regional center
incorporating a mix of uses such as retail stores and shops, restaurant or
cafeteria, without drive-thru, hotel, office, professional, medical, or
business, professional services, and similar nonresidential uses, and
residential uses as a secondary use around the depot baseball park.
            b.   The boundaries of the CS, Cleburne Station Overlay can be
found in subsection 2.04.G.
         2.   Minimum elements. The elements listed below are applicable to all
buildings within the CS, Cleburne Station Overlay and must be addressed along
with site plan requirements for each building constructed within the CS,
Cleburne Station Overlay:
            a.   Building massing and design.
               (1)   The heights of buildings shall vary and provide visual
variety in the massing of the buildings.
               (2)   Variations in building height should be accomplished in
such a manner that buildings complement each other and are not in visual
conflict.
               (3)   Buildings shall vary in their levels of detail, richness
of material, and overall complexity of design.
               (4)   Buildings located on more significant sites, such as
street intersections or at the termination of a street or vista, shall utilize
more intricate massing, richer materials, and finer detailing and shall provide
all items listed in subsection 4.06.A.3.
            b.   Building entrances.
               (1)   The design and location of building entrances shall easily
identify primary points of access.
               (2)   Building entrances shall be defined by massing, and
articulated with other architectural elements and signage that draw attention
to the entry.
               (3)   Building entrance elements shall be compatible with the
overall architectural character of the building.
               (4)   Along a street, entrances to shops shall be distinguished
from lobby entrances that provide access to upper floor uses.
            c.   Retail storefronts.
               (1)   Retail storefronts shall be characterized by higher
percentages of window area.
               (2)   Variation in storefront design between each tenant space
is encouraged and may include traditionally based design and well as
contemporary design.
               (3)   Storefronts shall be designed to be compatible with the
buildings' architectural expression.
               (4)   To promote variety, storefronts reflecting a high quality
of design and use of materials may be applied to buildings of different
character provided they do not detract from the building's overall design (see
Figure 27: Use of Different Architectural Styles on a Single Block).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7855.png]
 
         3.   Menu of additional elements.
            a.   Building design. All buildings up to 20,000 square feet of
gross floor area shall provide at least two of the following items and all
buildings over 20,000 square feet of gross floor area shall provide at least
three of the following items:
               (1)   Variation in overall building height of at least two feet
across a width spanning at least 25% of the length of the wall measured between
the corners of the façade;
               (2)   Transparent windows on at least 30% of all façades visible
from a right-of-way or public courtyard.
               (3)   Bay projections, show windows, porches, balconies (25
square feet minimum), canopies, awnings, setbacks measuring at least 15% of the
wall height, and loggia within an area comprising at least 50% of all façades
visible from a right-of-way or public courtyard;
               (4)   Architectural details such as base courses and water
tables, pilasters, sills, lintels, band courses, spandrel panels, and cornices;
               (5)   Use of Class 1 building materials on at least 90% of all
façades facing a street right-of-way or public courtyard and use of Class 2
building materials on the remaining percentage and use of Class 1 building
materials or Class 2 building materials on at least 90% all façades that do not
face a street right-of-way or public courtyard.
            b.   Landscaping and sidewalks. Buildings located at the
intersection of two streets and buildings greater than 20,000 square feet in
gross floor area shall provide at least one of the following:
               (1)   Sidewalk treatments such as stamped patterns and integral
color stain;
               (2)   Decorative plantings such as perennial flowers and other
foliage in clay-fired pots, living walls, or formal raised planters near public
building entrances and street corners;
               (3)   Outdoor dining and gathering spaces accessible directly
from the public sidewalk and providing shaded seating areas and trash
receptacles.
            c.   Additional standards applicable to multi-family, townhome, and
mixed-use buildings. Within the CS, Cleburne Station Overlay, all buildings
constructed for multi-family, townhome, or mixed-use with residential shall
conform to the following additional standards:
               (1)   Ground floor residential is limited to 75% of each block
face.
               (2)   On corner lots, the 25% of the block face that is closest
to the corner must be reserved for nonresidential uses.
               (3)   Garages and carports must be located behind the principal
building.
               (4)   Balconies must measure a minimum of 35 square feet per
bedroom.
               (5)   Ground floor units within multi-family or townhome
buildings must provide the following:
                  (a)   Direct door access along a street right-of-way by means
of a public sidewalk; or
                  (b)   An outdoor courtyard screened by a combination of
fencing with at least 50% transparency and continuous landscaping consisting of
shrubs or perennials reaching a maximum height of three feet at maturity.
      B.   F, Freeway Overlay standards.
         1.   Land use restrictions.
            a.   In the F, Freeway Overlay along the portion of the overlay
fronting the Chisholm Trail Parkway and the interchange of Chisholm Trail
Parkway and U.S. 67, the following uses are prohibited:
               (1)   Heavy load vehicle sales and service;
               (2)   Sexually oriented business;
               (3)   Gasoline or diesel truck filling or service station with
overnight parking;
               (4)   Parking (heavy load vehicles);
               (5)   Donation or recycling collection point;
               (6)   Recycling center;
               (7)   Recycling facility;
               (8)   Self-storage (mini warehouse facilities);
               (9)   Outside sales and outside storage;
               (10)   Tattoo or piercing studio;
               (11)   Petroleum and gas storage and collection facilities;
               (12)   Concrete or asphalt batching plant, permanent; and
               (13)   Automobile salvage.
            b.   Manufacturing or industrial operations are prohibited on
properties fronting U.S. 67 and the interchange of U.S. 67 and Chisolm Trail
Parkway.
            c.   In the remainder of the F, Freeway Overlay, the above uses
require a specific use permit (SUP).
            d.   As part of the initial zoning action (see subsection 1.04.B)
City Council may apply or extend the area of land use restriction within the
boundaries of the F, Freeway Overlay to additional territory when that
territory is annexed into the city.
         2.   Overlay boundaries.
            a.   The boundaries of the F, Freeway Overlay shown in subsection
2.04.H depict areas subject to the development regulations of this subsection
4.06.B.
            b.   Properties within the area of land use restriction shown in
subsection 4.06.B.1 but not within the overlay boundaries shown in subsection
2.04.H are only required to comply with the land use restrictions listed in
subsection 4.06.B.1.
         3.   Nonresidential building material requirements. All buildings
constructed for nonresidential use must comply with the following minimum
standards:
            a.   Primary façades must be constructed of 100% Class 1 building
materials or Class 2 building materials, excluding areas used for doors or
windows.
            b.   At least 90% of the primary façade must be constructed of
Class 1 building materials.
            c.   Secondary façades must be constructed of at least 65% Class 1
building materials or Class 2 building materials, excluding areas used for
doors or windows.
         4.   Nonresidential building articulation. Façade depth and height
articulation is required on any façade of a building that faces a right-of-way,
courtyard, plaza, or park in accordance with the following:
            a.   Depth articulation of at least three feet shall be required
for every 30 feet of building façade length. Depth articulation applies only
below the roofline.
            b.   Height articulation for flat roofs of at least five feet shall
be required for every 50 feet of building façade length. Pitched roofs do not
require height articulation.
         5.   Tripartite building design and composition. Tripartite design is
required on any façade of a building that faces a right-of-way, courtyard,
plaza, or park in accordance with the following:
            a.   Tripartite building composition consists of three distinct
elements (base, middle, and top) separated by one or a combination of the
following:
               (1)   Material variation by type, size, finish, or color
separated by a decorative transitional element such as contrasting banding;
               (2)   Change in horizontal plane such that the higher element is
set back from the element below it or projects out from the element below it,
such as a cornice;
               (3)   Change in pattern such as brick patterns, columns,
canopies, awnings, entablatures, windows such as transom or clerestory;
            b.   The tripartite shall be proportioned to the other elements of
the tripartite and the overall structure, with no element comprising more than
50% of the building height without a change in element as defined in subsection
4.06.B.5.a.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7853.png]
 
         6.   Roof design standards.
            a.   All structures shall be constructed with a pitched roof or
flat roof with a parapet.
            b.   All flat roof surfaces shall be screened from ground level
views so that such roof surfaces are not visible.
            c.   Parking structure decks shall not be considered roofs.
            d.   Roofs of stairwells and elevator machine rooms and other
similar spaces shall be exempt from roofing design standards so long as they
are not visible from ground level.
            e.   For the purpose of this paragraph, "visible" shall be defined
as capable of being seen at a height of six feet while standing at ground
level.
         7.   Alternative compliance for design standards. A request for
alternative compliance may be submitted and acted upon in accordance with
subsection 5.03 Alternative Compliance. The Zoning Administrator may approve
the following, based upon a finding that the proposed alternative is, at a
minimum, equivalent to and meets the spirit and intent of subsection 4.05
Design Standards.
            a.   Nonresidential design elements.
               (1)   Alternatives to the nonresidential design elements listed
in Table 17: Menu of Nonresidential Design Elements.
               (2)   Alternatives shall, in the determination of the Zoning
Administrator, produce a similar or greater level of architectural design than
the elements listed in Table 17: Menu of Nonresidential Design Elements.
            b.   Nonresidential building articulation.
               (1)   Alternative articulation standards which differ from the
requirement found in subsection 4.06.B.1.d may be approved.
               (2)   Alternative articulation standards shall, in the
determination of the Zoning Administrator, produce a same or greater level of
articulation than the requirement found in subsection 4.06.B.1.d.
         8.   Building façades located adjacent to property zoned I, Industrial
District or railway and railway right-of-way. The Zoning Administrator may
approve a waiver to building materials requirements found in subsections
4.06.B.1.d and 4.06.B.6 for a building façade that directly faces and abuts a
property zoned I, Industrial District or used as railway and railway right-of-
way.
      C.   MS, Main Street Overlay and HS, Henderson Street Overlay standards.
         1.   Purpose and applicability.
            a.   The MS, Main Street Overlay and HS, Henderson Street Overlay
do not apply to property zoned for Residential Use, zoned I, Industrial
District, or developed as a public use or building or play field or stadium.
            b.   The requirements of this subsection are in addition to all
other requirements of Section
155.4. If there is a conflict between this subsection and another requirement
or provision of Section 155.4, the requirements of this section will govern.
            c.   The boundaries of the MS, Main Street Overlay are shown in
subsection 2.04.E and the boundaries of the HS, Henderson Street Overlay are
shown in subsection 2.04.F.
         2.   Building design and layout.
            a.   Design requirements.
               (1)   New buildings must be constructed so that parking is
located to the side or rear of the building and not between the building and
the street. For platted lots that are less than two acres or less than 65 feet
in width, the Zoning Administrator may approve one row of parking between the
building and the street.
               (2)   Buildings at the corners of intersections must utilize
corner features that are a minimum of 15% higher than the remainder of the
façade and finished with a decorative cap or cornice that projects at least 12
inches from the building face. The corner feature must extend between 15% and
25% of the length of the façade.
               (3)   Buildings must provide window coverage according to the
following:
                  (a)   A minimum of 35% windows on the front façade (defined
as the façade containing the primary building entrance);
                  (b)   A minimum of 30% windows on all primary façades
(defined as all façades that face a public street or right-of-way); and
                  (c)   A minimum of 20% windows on all secondary façades.
               (4)   Of the window coverage required at least 60% must be
transparent.
               (5)   No more than 80% glass coverage is allowed on any façade.
               (6)   A landscaped edge equal to 20 feet shall be provided along
Main Street and Henderson Street and equal to 15 feet along intersecting
streets that abut any lot or development with frontage along Main Street and
Henderson Street.
               (7)   The landscaped edge may include any portion of the right-
of-way behind the curb if it meets the planting requirements below:
                  (a)   One shade tree or two ornamental trees per 30 feet,
which may be staggered; and
                  (b)   Sidewalks a minimum of six feet in width.
            b.   Building layout.
               (1)   Development or redevelopment involving three or more
buildings must configure all buildings in the following manner:
                  (a)   Buildings must be laid out in blocks separated by
internal streets, driveways, or pedestrian pathways to provide internal
circulation;
                  (b)   Buildings must be designed to frame or enclose parking
areas, open space, and amenities so that such areas are not predominantly
situated along the public right-of- way and are equally accessible and enjoyed
by users of each building;
                  (c)   Building entrances must face the street or an internal
common area such as a courtyard or park.
               (2)   Development or redevelopment involving one or two
buildings where the developed area is more than one acre, such as a shopping
center, must design parking lots, drive aisles, drainage facilities, and
underground utilities, to allow for future redevelopment of parking areas into
buildings that can be designed in a way that meets subsection 4.06.C.2.b(1).
            c.   Administrative setback reduction.
               (1)   The Zoning Administrator may reduce landscaping
requirements by 50% for properties within the MS, Main Street Overlay that
directly abut Main Street between Kilpatrick Avenue and Poindexter Avenue.
               (2)   The reduction may apply both to required plantings and
required depth of landscaping buffers.
            d.   The Zoning Administrator may approve a reduction in minimum
setback depth for properties in the MS, Main Street Overlay and HS, Henderson
Street Overlay if 50% or more of the buildings along both sides of the same
block have setbacks that are less than the minimum required setback on the lot
where the building is proposed. In granting a setback reduction, the Zoning
Administrator may not reduce the required landscape edge more than 50% and may
not approve a building setback closer to the right-of-way than the median
setback of all buildings along both sides of the same block.
            e.   Certain uses restricted.
               (1)   Within the MS, Main Street Overlay, a certificate of
occupancy will not be issued for any of the following:
                  (a)   Automobile salvage;
                  (b)   Automobile wrecker and impound lot.
               (2)   Within the HS, Henderson Street Overlay, a certificate of
occupancy will not be issued for any of the following:
                  (a)   Automobile body shop;
                  (b)   Automobile or other motorized vehicle sales and
service;
                  (c)   Automobile salvage;
                  (d)   Automobile service garage (major);
                  (e)   Automobile wrecker and impound lot.
               (3)   Existing uses listed in subsection 4.06.C.2.e(1) will be
treated as nonconforming uses subject to subsection 3.07.
               (4)   A specific use permit (SUP) may be approved in accordance
with subsection 5.09 to secure a certificate of occupancy for a change in
ownership of a prohibited use listed in subsections 4.06.C.2.e(1) and
4.06.C.2.e(2) that is in existence prior to the adoption of this ordinance. The
following will be taken into consideration at time of application for a
specific use permit (SUP) under this subsection 4.06.C.2.e:
                  (a)   Compliance with subsection 4.01 and 4.02; and
                  (b)   Compatibility of the existing use within the MS, Main
Street Overlay or HS, Henderson Street Overlay.
      D.   DTC, Downtown Core Overlay.
         1.   Downtown Core purpose.
            a.   The purpose of the DTC, Downtown Core Overlay is to preserve
the look and feel of historic Downtown Cleburne and abutting areas and
encourage the development of mixed commercial and residential uses while
ensuring that new development or modifications to existing development conform
to the historic pattern and style established in downtown.
            b.   The DTC, Downtown Core Overlay is intended to accommodate the
historic core of Cleburne centered around the courthouse square while allowing
for compatible infill development.
            c.   The DTC, Downtown Core Overlay is an area possessing buildings
with attributes that are unique within Cleburne, such as narrow lots, zero
setbacks, parking in the rear or the side of the lot, and buildings with
multiple stories and high levels of architectural detailing and form.
            d.   To preserve this pattern of development, the standards in this
subsection 4.06.D require that new construction or redevelopment or
refurbishment of existing buildings match the pattern and style of existing
buildings in the DTC, Downtown Core Overlay, including setback lines, lot
buildout (e.g., the percentage of the lot frontage that is covered by a
building), and architectural style.
         2.   Downtown Core design standards and applicability.
            a.   The boundaries of the DTC, Downtown Core Overlay are as shown
in Figure 29.
            b.   The standards in this subsection 4.06.D apply to all new
construction within the boundaries of the DTC, Downtown Core Overlay, and
additions to and remodeling of structures within the boundaries of the DTC,
Downtown Core Overlay.
            c.   Within the DTC, Downtown Core Overlay, secondary residential
uses are allowed provided that no less than 30% of the bottom floor of any
building is used for commercial purposes.
            d.   Development within the DTC, Downtown Core Overlay is exempt
from the following regulations:
               (1)   Off-street parking requirements (parking provided
voluntarily is subject to applicable requirements of subsection 4.03.A but is
exempt from landscaping requirements);
               (2)   Landscaped edge and landscaping for corner lots;
               (3)   Landscaping and screening for parking lots adjacent to
residential areas if an alley or street separates a nonresidential use within
the Downtown Core from a residential use;
               (4)   Building perimeter plantings for buildings 50,000 square
feet or larger for any portion of a building that abuts the street right-of-
way; and
               (5)   Minimum lot dimensions, provided that a building may not
be constructed on a lot that is less than 20 feet in width.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7863.png]
 
            e.   Existing buildings.
               (1)   Existing buildings in the Downtown Core that do not
conform to this subsection 4.06.D may be allowed to continue and to be repaired
and maintained provided that the building is not damaged or removed (as defined
in subsection 3.07) to an extent greater than 50% of its appraised value.
               (2)   If an existing building in the Downtown Core is damaged or
removed (as defined in subsection 3.07) to an extent greater than 50% of its
appraised value, the replacement or reconstruction must conform to this
subsection 4.06.D.
               (3)   If the ground floor square footage of a building is
expanded to 50% or less of its current ground floor square footage, only the
expanded area must conform to this subsection 4.06.D.
               (4)   If the ground floor square footage of a building is
expanded to more than 50% of its current ground floor square footage, the
entire building must conform to this subsection 4.06.D.
            f.   Building design.
               (1)   Parking must be placed to the side or the rear of the
building and comprise no more than 20% of the lot frontage where the front
façade is located and no more than 50% of any other frontage.
               (2)   Primary façades must be constructed of 90% Class 1
building materials with the remainder constructed of Class 2 building
materials, excluding areas used for doors or windows.
               (3)   Secondary façades must be constructed of 65% Class 1
building materials with the remainder consisting of or Class 2 building
materials, excluding areas used for doors or windows.
               (4)   All buildings within the Downtown Core must include the
following:
                  (a)   A distinctive base, middle, and top with each segment
distinguished by a change in materials, brick pattern, window pattern or style,
awnings, and cornice patterns or projections (see Figure 30: Tripartite Design
(Multi-Floor Building) and Figure 31: Tripartite Design (Single-Floor
Building));
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7861.png]
 
                  (b)   A covering over each public entry consisting of an
awning, recess, or combination as shown in Figure 32: Public Entry Covering.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7859.png]
 
               (5)   All buildings in the Downtown Core must utilize two of the
following features:
                  (a)   Canopies, awnings, or porticos extending beyond the
public entryway;
                  (b)   Outdoor patios;
                  (c)   Vertical or horizontal recesses or projections,
provided a horizontal projection does not extend more than three inches beyond
the right-of-way line;
                  (d)   Decorative window framing such as cornices, roundels,
arches, soldier course or similar;
                  (e)   Cornices projecting from the roof edge a distance of
six to 12 inches from the building face.
               (6)   Buildings must provide window coverage according to the
following:
                  (a)   A minimum of 35% window coverage on the bottom floor of
the front façade with individual panes being divided by a strip of masonry
material matching the primary building, and having a minimum six inch
separation between the sidewalk and the bottom of the window finished in brick
consistent with the examples shown in Figure 33: Example of Window Separation
and Framing;
                  (b)   All public entrances on the front façade must include
doors that are at least 60% transparent;
                  (c)   A minimum of 25% window coverage on the bottom floor of
primary façades other than the front façade; and
                  (d)   A minimum of 10% window coverage on the bottom floor of
all other façades.
                  (e)   Of the window coverage required at least 80% of the
bottom floor windows must be transparent on the front façade and primary
façades and 60% on all other façades.
                  (f)   No more than 65% glass coverage is allowed on any
façade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7857.png]
 
         3.   Downtown core dimensional standards.
Building Placement
Building Placement
                                          Principal Building Setbacks
                                          FS1 Front setback (min.)     0 ft.
                                          FS2 Front setback (max.)     10 ft.
                                          SS1 Side setback (min.)      0 ft.
                                              (secondary street)
                                              Side setback (max.)      15 ft. *
                                          SS2 (secondary street)
                                              * Must meet FB1
                                              Side setback (min.)      0 ft. *
                                          SS3 (interior)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/            * Fire separation standards apply
35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/ RS  Rear setback (min.)      5 ft.
IMAGES/0-0-0-7867.png]                    Parking Setbacks
                                              Primary street setback   5 ft.
                                          PS1 (min.)
                                              OR behind the principal building
                                              Secondary street setback 5 ft.
                                          PS2 (min.)
                                              OR behind the principal building
                                          PS3 Side setback (min.)      0 ft.
                                          PS4 Rear setback (min.)      0 ft. **
                                          Building Height
                                             Maximum height           50 ft.
 
         4.   Other requirements and allowances.
            a.   The base (bottom level) of parking garages must be finished in
Class 1 building materials or Class 2 building materials on all sides abutting
a primary or secondary public street and utilize architectural detailing
similar to buildings on the abutting blocks.
            b.   Within the DTC, Downtown Core Overlay, the following are
minimum unit sizes for residential units:
               Multi-family and mixed-use:
               (1)   Efficiency: 350 square feet;
               (2)   One bedroom, studio, or loft: 450 square feet;
               (3)   Two bedroom: 650 square feet;
               (4)   Additional bedrooms: 150 square feet.
      E.   DTT, Downtown Transition Overlay.
         1.   Downtown Transition purpose.
            a.   The purpose of the Downtown Overlay is to preserve the look
and feel of historic Downtown Cleburne and abutting areas and encourage the
development of mixed commercial and residential uses while ensuring that new
development or modifications to existing development conform to the historic
pattern and style established in downtown.
            b.   The Downtown Transition is intended to accommodate a wide
range of development and redevelopment within the blocks immediately
surrounding the historic core of Cleburne.
            c.   The Downtown Transition is an area distinguished by a mix of
residential and nonresidential uses, setbacks, and architectural styles with a
high degree of vehicle and pedestrian integration with the Downtown Core.
            d.   New construction or reconstruction in the Downtown Transition
must be designed to complement existing buildings and possess a high degree of
character through the use of compatible materials and design features.
         2.   Downtown Transition design standards and applicability.
            a.   The Downtown Transition boundaries are as shown in Figure 29:
Downtown Overlay Boundaries.
            b.   A single-family detached residential dwelling may be
constructed anywhere within the Downtown Transition Zone subject to the
standards of subsection 3 below.
            c.   Development within the Downtown Transition is subject to the
following regulations:
               (1)   Required off-street parking is reduced by 50% (see
subsection 3.03 Use Chart) (parking provided voluntarily is subject to all
applicable requirements of Section 155.4);
               (2)   The requirement to plant a landscaped edge and landscaping
for corner lots is waived;
               (3)   Landscaping and screening for parking lots adjacent to
residential areas is waived if an alley or street separates a nonresidential
use within the Downtown Core from a residential use;
               (4)   Building perimeter plantings for buildings 50,000 square
feet or larger are waived for any portion of a building that abuts the street
right-of-way;
               (5)   Building materials and design requirements must conform to
subsection 4.06.E.2.e.
               (6)   Buildings are subject to the minimum lot width
requirements in subsection 4.06.E.3.
            d.   Existing buildings.
               (1)   Existing buildings in the Downtown Transition that do not
conform to this subsection E may be allowed to continue and to be repaired and
maintained provided that the building is not damaged or removed (as defined in
subsection 3.07) to an extent greater than 50% of its appraised value.
               (2)   If an existing building in the Downtown Transition is
damaged or removed (as defined in subsection 3.07) to an extent greater than
50% of its appraised value, the replacement or reconstruction must conform to
this subsection 4.06.E.
               (3)   If the ground floor square footage of a building is
expanded to 50% or less of its current ground floor square footage, only the
expanded area must conform to this subsection 4.06.E.
               (4)   If the ground floor square footage of a building is
expanded to more than 50% of its current ground floor square footage, the
entire building must conform to this subsection 4.06.E.
            e.   Single-family and duplex building design.
               (1)   Primary façades must be constructed of one or more of the
following materials:
                  (a)   Treated or painted wood siding or fiber cement panel
that mimics the grain and texture of wood;
                  (b)   Stacked and mortar-bonded brick;
                  (c)   Stone with a natural color and finish.
               (2)   Brick or stone shall comprise no more than 20% of the
primary façade.
               (3)   Secondary façades must be constructed of at least 80%
treated or painted wood siding or fiber cement panel that mimics the grain and
texture of wood, with the remainder consisting of any Class 1 building
materials or Class 2 building materials.
               (4)   Each single-family detached residential and duplex
dwelling must have a covered porch integrated with the design of the dwelling.
The porch must be at least five feet deep and extend at least 20% of the width
of the front façade.
               (5)   Garages must be rear or side loaded or alley-fed.
               (6)   The minimum eave depth is six inches on all façades.
               (7)   Roof covering must consist of architectural shingle or
standing seam metal.
               (8)   In addition to the design requirements of this subsection
4.06.E.2.e, each dwelling must provide a minimum of two of the following
features:
                  (a)   Roof pitch between 4:12 and 12:12;
                  (b)   Decorative treatments or techniques employed on columns
supporting the front porch including tapering, turning, or contrasting trim;
                  (c)   Arched entryway trimmed in wood or stone;
                  (d)   Decorative window treatments such as muntins, cornices,
roundels, arches, soldier course, or similar features;
                  (e)   One or more dormers or bay windows on the front façade;
                  (f)   One or more eave brackets or rafter tails supporting,
or giving the appearance of supporting, each eave that is parallel to the front
façade;
                  (g)   Contrasting siding color, material, or technique on one
or more gables along the front façade including natural or stained wood, board
and batten, shake shingle, scallops, or other contrasting technique that
employs a recognized style of architecture.
               (9)   Dwellings that exceed 2,000 square feet must provide one
additional feature under subsection 4.06.E.2.e(8).
               (10)   The standards of this subsection 4.06.E.2.e apply to
single-family detached residential and duplex buildings regardless of actual
building use.
            f.   Nonresidential building design.
               (1)   Nonresidential buildings that do not conform to subsection
4.06.E.2.e must conform to the standards of this subsection 4.06.E.2.f.
               (2)   Primary façades must be constructed of 75% Class 1
building materials with the remainder constructed of Class 2 building
materials, excluding areas used for doors or windows.
               (3)   Secondary façades must be constructed of 65% Class 1
building materials with the remainder constructed of Class 2 building
materials, excluding areas used for doors or windows.
               (4)   Buildings that are 10,000 square feet or less must provide
a distinct entry feature using arches, columns, towers or other roof
articulation and provide at least one feature listed in subsection 4.06.D.2.f
(5).
               (5)   Buildings that are greater than 10,000 square feet must
provide a distinct entry feature using arches, columns, towers or other roof
articulation and provide at least two features listed in subsection 4.06.D.2.f
(5).
               (6)   Parking is required to be to the side or rear of the
principal building and comprises no more than 50% of the lot frontage.
         3.   Downtown Transition dimensional standards.
Building Placement
Building Placement
                                          Principal Building Setbacks
                                          FS1 Front setback    0 ft.
                                              (min.)
                                          FS2 Front setback    20 ft.
                                              (max.)
                                              Side setback
                                          SS1 (min.)           0 ft.
                                              (secondary
                                              street)
                                              Side setback
                                          SS2 (min.)           0 ft.
                                              (interior)
                                          RS  Rear setback     5 ft.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/            (min.)
35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/ Parking Setbacks
IMAGES/0-0-0-7865.png]                        Primary street   5 ft.
                                          PS1 setback (min.)
                                              OR behind the principal building
                                              on the lot
                                          PS2 Secondary street 5 ft.
                                              setback (min.)
                                          PS3 Side setback     0 ft.
                                              (min.)
                                              Rear setback     0 ft. **
                                          PS4 (min.)
                                              ** Rear parking setback from the
                                              centerline of the alley is 15 ft.
                                          Building Height
                                             Maximum height   40 ft.
 
 
Density and Dimensions
Maximum Number of Dwelling Units per    32
Acre (Net Density)
                                        Front setback: 10 ft.
                                        Side setback: 5 ft. (single-family or
Minimum Setback for Building Abutting a duplex 20 ft. in height or less)
Single-family Detached or Duplex        10 ft. (single-family or duplex over 20
Dwelling                                ft. in height)
                                        20 ft. (building types other than
                                        single-family or duplex)
Maximum Building Height                 40 ft.
 
 
Permissible Building Types       Lot Standards, and Conditions
Single-family detached or duplex Min. Lot Width = 40 ft.
Townhouse                        Min. Lot Width = 20 ft. (per unit)
Multi-family                     Min. Lot Width = 100 ft.
Mixed-use building               Min. Lot Width = 20 ft.
Nonresidential use               Min. Lot Width = 20 ft.
 
         4.   Other requirements and allowances.
            a.   The base (bottom level) of parking garages must be finished in
Class 1 building materials or Class 2 building materials on all sides abutting
a primary or secondary public street and utilize architectural detailing
similar to buildings on the abutting blocks.
            b.   Within the DTT, Downtown Transition, the following are minimum
unit sizes for residential units:
               (1)   Single-family detached residential, duplex, and townhome:
1,000 square feet
               (2)   Multi-family and mixed use:
                  (a)   One bedroom, efficiency, studio, or loft: 450 square
feet;
                  (b)   Two bedroom: 650 square feet;
                  (c)   Additional bedrooms: 150 square feet.
      F.   AP, Airport Overlay standards.
         1.   Purpose and applicability.
            a.   The purpose of the AP, Airport Overlay District is to ensure
development near the airport is compatible with airport operations, that land
uses surrounding the airport are developed according to the recommendations of
the Airport Master Plan, to limit the adverse impacts of airport operations on
adjacent properties by accounting for those impacts in the development and use
of property near the airport, and to protect the airport from incompatible
encroachments.
            b.   The AP, Airport Overlay is applicable to each property within
the district in addition to the regulations of the base district classification
in which such property is located. If regulations are found to be in conflict,
the most restrictive regulation will govern if it does not conflict with the
intent and purpose of the AP, Airport Overlay.
            c.   For the purposes of regulating building height, construction
in the AP, Airport Overlay is regulated within nine zones indicated in
subsection 4.06.F.3.
            d.   For the purposes of regulating noise reduction for certain
land uses, the AP, Airport Overlay is divided into three zones indicated in
subsection 4.06.F.4. The zoning classification of each property is designated
by the base district classification plus the AP, Airport Overlay designation.
For example, a property in a CI, Commercial/Industrial Flex District within the
AP district will carry a CI (AP-1, 2, or 3) designation.
            e.   Within the AP district, the regulations of each respective
base district shall continue to apply to property located in that district,
except as supplemented or modified in this subsection 4.06.F.
         2.   Definitions. Within this subsection 4.06.F, the following terms
will have the meaning ascribed to them:
            a.   AIRPORT. The Cleburne Regional Airport.
            b.   AIRPORT ELEVATION. Eight hundred fifty-four feet above mean
sea level.
            c.   APPROACH SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on the
extended runway center line, extending outward and upward from the end of the
primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation
slope set forth in subsection 3.c below. In plan the perimeter of the APPROACH
SURFACE coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.
            d.   COMPATIBLE LAND USE. The use of land adjacent to the airport
that does not endanger the health, safety, or welfare of the owners, occupants,
or users of the land because of levels of noise or vibrations or because of the
risk of personal injury or property damage created by the operations of the
airport, including take-off and landing of aircraft.
            e.   CONICAL SURFACE. A surface extending outward and upward from
the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20:1 for a horizontal
distance of 4,000 feet.
            f.   CONTROLLED COMPATIBLE LAND USE AREA. The area within which
airport land use compatibility controls may be instituted, as defined by Tex.
Local Gov’t Code § 241.003. The controlled area is located outside the airport
boundaries and within an area measured no farther than one and one-half miles
from the centerline of the airport runways and lines located no farther than
five miles from each end of the paved surface of the runways.
            g.   HAZARD. An obstruction determined to have a substantial
adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
            h.   HEIGHT. For the purpose of determining the height limits of
buildings within the AP, Airport Overlay, the datum shall be measured with
reference to mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
            i.   HORIZONTAL SURFACE. A horizontal plane 150 feet above the
established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with
the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
            j.   LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY. A runway that is constructed for
and intended to be used by propeller drive aircraft of greater than 12,500
pounds maximum gross weight and jet powered aircraft.
            k.   LDN (YEARLY DAY-NIGHT AVERAGE SOUND LEVEL). The 24-hour
average sound level, in decibels, for the period from midnight to midnight,
obtained after the addition of ten decibels to sound levels for the periods
between midnight and 7:00 a.m. and between 10:00 p.m. and midnight and averaged
over a span of one year. A mathematical definition of LDN can be found in
Federal Aviation Regulation Part 150, Section A150.201.
            l.   NOISE LEVEL REDUCTION. The amount of noise level reduction
achieved through incorporation of noise attenuation measures in the design and
construction of a structure.
            m.   NONCONFORMING. Any preexisting structure, object of natural
growth, or use of land that is inconsistent with the provisions of the AP,
Airport Overlay.
            n.   OBSTRUCTION. Any structure, growth, or other object, including
a mobile object, that exceeds the height limits of subsection 3.c below.
            o.   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
company, association, joint stock association or body politic, and includes a
trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian, or other
representative.
            p.   PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS) or a
precision approach radar (PAR). Also a runway for which a precision approach
system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any
other planning document.
            q.   PRIMARY SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on a
runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the PRIMARY
SURFACE extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; the width of the
primary surface is set forth in subsection 4.06.F.3.b Establishment of Height
Limitation Zones. The elevation of any point on the PRIMARY SURFACE is the same
as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
            r.   RUNWAY. The defined area of the airport used for landing and
take-off of aircraft along its length.
            s.   STRUCTURE. An object, including a mobile object, that is
artificially constructed or installed, including but without limitation,
buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead
transmission lines.
            t.   TRANSITIONAL SURFACES. Surfaces extending outward at 90 degree
angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope
of seven feet horizontally for each one foot vertically from the sides of the
primary surface and approach surface to where they intersect the horizontal
surface and conical surface. TRANSITIONAL SURFACES for those portions of the
precision approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the
conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the
edge of the approach surface and at 90 degree angles to the extended runway
centerline.
            u.   TREE. Any object growing naturally above the ground.
            v.   UTILITY RUNWAY. A runway that is constructed for and intended
to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight
or less.
            w.   VISUAL RUNWAY. A runway intended solely for the operation of
aircraft using visual approach procedures.
         3.   Height limitation zones.
            a.   Purpose and applicability.
               (1)   For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this
subsection 4.06.F.3, the AP, Airport Overlay is divided into the zones listed
in this subsection 4.06.F.3.
               (2)   These zones include all of the land lying beneath the
approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical surfaces as they apply to the
airport.
            b.   Establishment of height limitation zones.
               (1)    Such zones are shown on Cleburne Regional Airport Zoning
Map consisting of two sheets, prepared by Coffman Associates, and adopted by
City Council on December 13, 2022, which is made a part of this subsection
4.06.F by reference.
               (2)   An area located in more than one of the zones listed in
this subsection 4.06.F.3 is considered to be only in the zone with the more
restrictive height limitation.
               (3)   Any structure constructed within one or more height
limitation zones must comply with subsection 4.06.F.3.c(2).
               (4)   Height Limitation Zones defined.
                  (a)   Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone. The inner edge of
this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 250
feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet
at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center
line is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
                  (b)   Utility Runway Non Precision Instrument Approach Zone.
The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary
surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a
width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary
surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
                  (c)   Runway Larger than Utility Visual Approach Zone. The
inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary
surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a
width of 1,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary
surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
                  (d)   Runway Larger than Utility (Visibility Minimum Greater
Than Three-Fourths Mile Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone). The inner edge
of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is
500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,500
feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its
centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
                  (e)   Runway Larger than Utility (Visibility Minimum as Low
as Three-Fourths Mile Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone). The inner edge
of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is
1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of
4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface.
Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
                  (f)   Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone. The inner
edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and
is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of
16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface.
Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
                  (g)   Transitional Zones. The transitional zones are the
areas beneath the transitional surfaces.
                  (h)   Horizontal Zone. The horizontal zone is established by
swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii for a utility runway or visual runway and
10,000 feet for all others from the center of each end of the primary surface
of the runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to
those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional
zones.
                  (i)   Conical Zone. The conical zone is established as the
area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward
therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
            c.   Height limitations.
               (1)   The city will not issue a building permit for a structure
to be constructed, altered, or maintained to a height exceeding the maximum
listed in this subsection c.
               (2)   No property owner shall construct or alter any structure
or allow a tree to exceed the maximum height within a height limitation zone as
listed below:
                  (a)   Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone. Slopes 20 feet
outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation
as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet
along the extended runway centerline.
                  (b)   Utility Runway Non Precision Instrument Approach Zone.
Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the
same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of
5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.
                  (c)   Runway Larger than Utility Visual Approach Zone. Slopes
20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of
5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.
                  (d)   Runway Larger than Utility (Visibility Minimum Greater
Than Three-Fourths Mile Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone). Slopes 34 feet
outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation
as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet
along the extended runway centerline.
                  (e)   Runway Larger than Utility (Visibility Minimum as Low
as Three-Fourths Mile Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone). Slopes 34 feet
outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation
as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000
feetalong the extended runway centerline.
                  (f)   Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone. Slopes 50
feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of
10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline then slopes upward 40 feet
horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of
40,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.
                  (g)   Transitional Zones. Slopes seven feet outward for each
foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary
surface and the approach surface and extending to a height of 150 feet above
the airport elevation.
                     (i)   In addition to the foregoing, there are established
height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the
sides of and the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where
they intersect the conical surface.
                     (ii)   Where the Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone
projects beyond the Conical Zone, there are established height limits sloping
seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and the same
elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000
feet measured at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline.
                  (h)   Horizontal Zone. Established at 150 feet above the
airport elevation or at a height of 1,105 feet above mean sea level.
                  (i)   Conical Zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the periphery of the Horizontal Zone and at 150 feet above
the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport
elevation.
               (3)   Exceptions. Nothing in this subsection 3 prohibits the
construction or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree to a height
up to 50 feet above the surface of the land.
         4.   Airport noise zones.
            a.   Airport noise zones are established within the Controlled
Compatible Land Use Area for the purpose of regulating the development of noise
sensitive land uses, to promote compatibility between the airport and
surrounding land uses, and to protect the airport from incompatible
encroachments.
            b.   Zones. The boundaries of the airport noise zones correspond to
the Ldn noise contours shown on the most recently-adopted noise exposure map
for the airport and are identified as follows:
               (1)   Airport Overlay-1 (AP-1) is that area within the
Controlled Compatible Land Use Area with a noise contour that is between 65 Ldn
(Yearly Day-Night Average Sound Level) and 70 Ldn (Yearly Day-Night Average
Sound Level).
               (2)   Airport Overlay-2 (AP-2) is that area within the
Controlled Compatible Land Use Area with a noise contour that is between 70 Ldn
(Yearly Day-Night Average Sound Level) and 75 Ldn (Yearly Day-Night Average
Sound Level).
               (3)   Airport Overlay-3 (AP-3) is that area within the
Controlled Compatible Land Use Area beyond the 75 Ldn (Yearly Day-Night Average
Sound Level) noise contour.
            c.   Compatible uses permitted within the airport noise zones are
shown in Table 19: Compatible Land Uses.
         5.   Compatible Land Uses Table. Below is how to use the table.
            a.   A cell with a "Y" indicates that the land use and related
structures are compatible without restrictions.
            b.   A cell with an "N" indicates that the land use and related
structures are not compatible and are prohibited.
            c.   A cell with a number ("25" or "30") indicates that measures to
achieve Noise Level Reduction (NLR) from outdoor to indoor must be incorporated
into the design and construction of the entire structure.
            d.   Where "N" is indicated for a residential use followed by "25"
or "30", it means that residential use is not compatible but if the property is
zoned for residential, measures to achieve outdoor to indoor Noise Level
Reduction (NLR) of at least 25 dB or 30 dB must be achieved, as indicated.
Normal single-family construction can be expected to provide a Noise Level
Reduction of 20 dB, meaning that Noise Level Reduction measures in this area
require a reduction of 5 to 10 dB over standard construction and generally
assume mechanical ventilation and closed windows year-round. However, the use
of NLR criteria will not eliminate outdoor noise problems.
            e.   Where "Y" is indicated for a use followed by a "25", it means
that the use is compatible where measures to achieve a Noise Level Reduction of
25 dB are incorporated into the design and construction of portions of
buildings where the public is received, office areas, noise sensitive areas, or
where the normal noise level is low.
            f.   Where "Y" is indicated for a use followed by a "30", it means
that the use is compatible where measures to achieve Noise Level Reduction of
30 dB are incorporated into the design and construction of portions of
buildings where the public is received, office areas, noise sensitive areas, or
where the normal noise level is low.
            g.   Where ("R25") is indicated, only the use listed is compatible.
Any residential buildings associated with the use require a Noise Level
Reduction of 25 dB to be compatible.
            h.   Where ("R30") is indicated, only the use listed is compatible.
Any residential buildings associated with the use require a Noise Level
Reduction of 30 dB to be compatible.
   Table 19: Compatible Land Uses
         Noise Zone
Land Use O-A 1    O-A 2     O-A 2
         65-70 dB >70-75 dB >75 dB
                                                     Noise Zone
Land Use                                             O-A 1    O-A 2     O-A 2
                                                     65-70 dB >70-75 dB >75 dB
Residential use (other than manufactured housing)    N(25)    N(30)     N
Manufactured housing, mobile home parks, trailer     N        N         N
parks, trailer courts, or trailer subdivisions
Mixed-use with residential                           N(25)    N(30)     N
Hospital, chronic care                               N        N         N
Hospital, acute care and medical clinic              Y        Y(25)     Y(30)
Park, playground, or community center, public        Y        N         N
Play field or stadium                                Y        Y         Y
Public use or building                               Y        25        30
Animal shelter or pet boarding (with outside yard/   Y        N         N
kennels) or stable
Any use with "automobile" in the description         Y        Y(25)     Y(30)
Country club or golf course                          Y        25        30
Gym or health/fitness center                         Y        25        30
Office, professional, medical, or business, radio or Y        25        30
TV station (no tower)
Professional services                                Y        25        30
Personal service shop                                Y        25        30
Research or scientific laboratory                    Y        25        30
Restaurant, cafeteria, brewery or distillery         Y        25        30
Boarding house, hotel, hotel, extended stay, motel   N(25)    N(30)     N
Nonresidential uses not listed                       Y        Y         Y
Religious use                                        Y        Y(25)     Y(30)
Convenience store, retail stores and shops, thrift   Y        25        30
store, tobacco, vapor, e-cigarette store
School, K-12, school, career, school, college or     N        N         N
university
Banquet hall, wedding chapel, reception facility, or Y        Y(25)     Y(30)
special events center
Tattoo or piercing studio                            Y        Y(25)     Y(30)
Contractor's shop or storage yard (temporary         Y        Y(25)     Y(30)
buildings exempted)
Manufacturing or industrial operations               Y        Y         Y
Warehouse/distribution                               Y        Y         Y
Wholesale center                                     Y        Y(25)     Y(30)
 
         6.   Interference with airport operations. No use within the AP,
Airport Overlay shall be conducted in such a way that creates any of the
following effects:
            a.   Creation of electrical interference with navigational signals
or radio communication between the airport and aircraft;
            b.   Utilizing lighting in a way that creates difficulty in
distinguishing between airport lights and lights employed by the use within the
AP, Airport Overlay;
            c.   Creation of glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport or
impairing visibility in the vicinity of the airport;
            d.   Creation of bird strike hazards; or
            e.   Otherwise endangering or interfering with the safe landing,
taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
         7.   Existing buildings and lots within the AP, Airport Overlay.
            a.   Regulations not retroactive.
               (1)   The regulations prescribed by this division shall not be
construed to require changes in land use or the removal or other change or
alteration of any structure not conforming to the regulations as of the
effective date of this division or otherwise interfere with the continuance of
any nonconforming use.
               (2)   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in
construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or
alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this subsection
and whose completion is diligently pursued.
               (3)   For purposes of this division, permitted nonconforming
structures shall include all phases or elements of a multi-phase structure,
whether or not actual construction has commenced, which has received a
determination of no hazard by the Federal Aviation Administration under Part 77
of the Federal Aviation Regulation (14 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 77).
            b.   Exceptions for residential uses.
               (1)   Existing residences. Notwithstanding any other provisions
of this subsection, all residential uses located within the airport noise zones
that were lawfully existing on the effective day of this Zoning Ordinance may
be repaired and enlarged provided the number of dwelling units is not
increased.
               (2)   Vacant lots. Vacant platted lots which are zoned for
single-family residential uses may be used for single-family residences
providing they conform to all other applicable requirements of this division.
Such lots may not be subdivided into more than one additional lot for single-
family residential use.
               (3)   New residences. New residential structures within the AP-
1 district must achieve an outdoor to indoor noise level reduction of at least
25 dB.
               (4)   Reconstruction. The provisions of subsection 3.07
Nonconformities apply to all nonconforming uses and structures within the AP,
Airport Overlay.
         8.   Variance and appeal.
            a.   Variances. The Board of Zoning Adjustment is the board
responsible for hearing and deciding requests for variances under this section
(see subsection 6.02 Zoning Variance).
            b.   Appeals.
               (1)   The Building Official is responsible for determining
compliance with this section.
               (2)   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the building
official made in administration of this subsection may appeal to the Board of
Zoning Adjustment (see subsection 6.01 Zoning Regulation Appeal).
(Ord. 04-2022-34, passed 4-12-22; Am. Ord. 02-2023-09, passed 2-28-23; Am. Ord.
06-2023-39, passed 6-13-23; Am. Ord. 09-2023-61, passed 9-12-23; Am. Ord. 01-
2025-01, passed 1-14-25)
§ 155.5 ZONING APPLICATION SUBMITTAL AND PROCESSING PROCEDURES.
   5.01.   General Application Processing.
      A.   Purpose and applicability.
         1.   To promote efficiency in processing applications for development,
the city may from time to time create standardized development application
forms and a consolidated list of required documents and information that must
be provided prior to development approval.
         2.   Any applicant seeking approval of an application governed by this
Section 155.5 must submit a complete application and comply with all
requirements of this subsection.
      B.   Pre-application meeting. All applicants must attend an informal and
nonbinding pre-application meeting prior to submitting an application, unless
the requirement to attend a pre-application meeting is waived by the Zoning
Administrator.
      C.   Application materials.
         1.   The city will furnish a standardized application form pertaining
to each application type listed in this subsection.
         2.   The city will include with the application form a complete list
of submittal requirements for the application to be considered complete. The
list may include, but may not be limited to, the following submittal
requirements:
            a.   List of persons, such as the property owner, an agent, or
other entity who are required to sign or acknowledge the application;
            b.   Documents that constitute proof of ownership;
            c.   Property description and legal boundaries;
            d.   Requirements for plan scale and level of plan detail;
            e.   Information regarding property outside the boundaries of the
subject property; and
            f.   Number and type of supporting technical documents and plans
including:
               (1)   Legal surveys;
               (2)   Line drawings;
               (3)   Schematics;
               (4)   Architectural elevations;
               (5)   Topographical surveys;
               (6)   Hydrologic studies; and
               (7)   Other information directly related to determining whether
the application complies with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
         3.   The city may set fees associated with each application in a
published fee schedule for the purpose of recovering costs related to reviewing
the application except for Board of Zoning Adjustment Appeal (see subsection
6.01 below) which shall be $400.
         4.   The city may require a property owner who uses an agent, such as
an engineer, architect, land planner, surveyor, or real estate professional, to
submit an application to provide written and signed or acknowledged
authorization for the agent to submit the application on the property owner's
behalf.
      D.   Payment of indebtedness.
         1.   The applicant is responsible for providing proof that no
delinquent taxes or fees are associated with property that is the subject of an
application.
         2.   At any point in the application process, the Zoning Administrator
may require that the applicant submit necessary documentation or proof that no
taxes or fees are delinquent or outstanding on property that is the subject of
an application. The Zoning Administrator may choose to accept an application
without such documentation or proof if the applicant agrees to provide
documentation or proof that no taxes or fees are owed prior to approval of the
application.
      E.   Application determination of completeness.
         1.   No application shall be deemed complete and accepted for
processing unless it is accompanied by all documents required by and prepared
in accordance with the requirements of this subsection 5.01.
         2.   For a determination of completeness to be issued, an application
must include the following:
            a.   A completed application form;
            b.   Every item, study, and document required by this subsection
5.01 for the type of application being submitted, or required for the plan for
development;
            c.   Applicable fee(s), as specified in the fee schedule or any
applicable ordinance; and
            d.   Evidence that the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance and
other ordinances of the city are satisfied.
         3.   A determination of completeness shall not constitute a
determination of compliance with the substantive requirements of this
subsection 5.01.
         4.   Not later than the tenth business day after the date an
application is submitted, the Zoning Administrator shall make a written
determination whether the application constitutes a complete application.
            a.   The written determination shall include a determination of
whether all information and documents required by this subsection 5.01 have
been submitted.
            b.   The determination shall be provided to the applicant within
such time period by electronic mail, United States Certified Mail, or regular
mail at the address listed on the application, or by personal delivery to the
applicant or the applicant's agent.
            c.   A determination that an application is incomplete shall
specify the documents or other information needed to complete the application
and shall state that the application will expire if the documents or other
information is not submitted within 45 calendar days after the date the
application was submitted.
         5.   An application filed on or after the effective date of this
subsection 5.01 shall be deemed complete on the 11th business day after the
application has been received, if the applicant has not otherwise been notified
that the application is incomplete.
         6.   For purposes of this section, the applicant shall be deemed to
have been notified if the city has mailed or delivered a copy of the
determination as provided in subsection 5.01.E.4.
         7.   The processing of an application by any city employee prior to
the time the application is determined to be complete shall not be binding on
the city as the official date of acceptance of the application for filing. The
date of filing shall be the date the Zoning Administrator determines that the
application meets the requirements of this subsection 5.01.
         8.   The incompleteness of the application shall be grounds for denial
regardless of whether a determination of incompleteness was provided to the
applicant.
         9.   A development application shall expire on the 45th calendar day
after the application is submitted to the Zoning Administrator for processing
if the applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary to
meet the requirements of this subsection 5.01 as specified in the determination
provided to the applicant. Upon expiration, the application will be returned to
the applicant together with any accompanying documents. Thereafter, a new
application for approval of the development application must be submitted. The
Zoning Administrator may approve an extension of up to 30 days at the written
request of the applicant.
         10.   No vested rights accrue solely from the filing of an application
that has expired pursuant to this subsection 5.01, or from the filing of a
complete or incomplete application that is subsequently denied.
      F.   Action by Zoning Administrator.
         1.   The date that the applicant furnishes a signed application to the
Zoning Administrator or designee is considered the official date that
application was received. The Zoning Administrator will process the
application, including any required submittal dates and applicable requirements
of this Zoning Ordinance in a manner consistent with Tex. Local Gov’t Code
Chapter 245.
         2.   Once the Zoning Administrator accepts the application as a
complete application, the Zoning Administrator or a designee will coordinate
review of the submitted materials for conformance with the requirements of this
Zoning Ordinance.
         3.   Following review of the application by all applicable
departments, the Zoning Administrator or a designee will respond in writing to
the applicant with a coordinated set of comments that list and describe any
deficiencies the applicant must address in order for the application to be
considered.
         4.   If approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council
is required for an application to be approved, the Zoning Administrator will
schedule the application on the next available agenda of the applicable body
once all comments and deficiencies (see subsection 5.01.f.3) are addressed or
as consistent with state law.
   5.02.   Dormant Projects and Vested Rights Petition.
      A.   Dormant projects.
         1.   This subsection 5.02 is adopted under Tex. Local Gov’t Code
Chapter 245 to provide expiration dates for permits that lack an expiration
date under applicable regulations. This subsection does not apply to a permit
that is subject to an expiration date under the regulations applicable to the
permit. For purposes of this subsection, a permit that is not subject to an
expiration date is an "unexpired permit."
         2.   If an unexpired permit was approved prior to the effective date
of this Zoning Ordinance, it shall expire five years after the date of its
approval, unless the applicant submits evidence sufficient to show that
progress towards completion of the project was made prior to expiration.
         3.   For purposes of this subsection, progress towards completion of a
project includes any one of the following:
            a.   An application for a final plat or plan has been submitted and
deemed complete;
            b.   A good-faith attempt has been made to file with the city or
other regulatory agency an application for a permit necessary to begin or
continue towards completion of the project;
            c.   Costs have been incurred for developing the project including,
without limitation, costs associated with roadway, utility, and other
infrastructure facilities designed to serve, in whole or in part, the project
(but exclusive of land acquisition) in the aggregate amount of 5% of the most
recent appraised market value of the real property on which the project is
located;
            d.   Fiscal security has been posted with the city or other
regulatory agency to ensure performance of an obligation required by that
regulatory agency; or
            e.   Utility connection fees or impact fees for the project have
been paid and account is in good standing.
         4.   If the first permit in a series of permits for a project expires
based on dormancy of the project, then that permit cannot form the basis of a
vested rights petition.
      B.   Vested rights.
         1.   Purpose and applicability.
            a.   This subsection 5.02 establishes requirements for determining
whether a project is entitled to vested rights under Tex. Local Gov’t Code
Chapter 245 or § 43.002. To the extent a project is entitled to vested rights,
as determined under this subsection, a permit necessary to initiate, continue,
or complete the project may be exempt from some requirements of this Zoning
Ordinance.
            b.   The purpose of this subsection 5.02 is to:
               (1)   Establish a clear and consistent process for evaluating
vested rights claims;
               (2)   Ensure that vested rights determinations are based on
accurate and complete information, including the nature and scope of the
original project for which vested rights are asserted, as well as any actual
development that has occurred over time; and
               (3)   Recognize legitimate claims of vested rights under state
law, while ensuring that new development complies to the greatest extent
possible with current regulations.
         2.   Vested rights petition required.
            a.   A petition for vested rights shall be submitted by a landowner
or a landowner's agent in order to request that an application for a permit be
reviewed under ordinances, regulations, or rules other than those in effect on
the date the application is filed.
            b.   The petition shall conform to the requirements of subsection
5.02.B.3.
         3.   Contents of vested rights petition. A petition for vested rights
shall be submitted in a form approved by the Zoning Administrator and must
include, at a minimum, the following information:
            a.   A permit application for development of the property, which
must be submitted concurrent with the vested rights petition;
            b.   A conceptual development plan for the property, including the
scope and intensity of development, as well as the nature of the land use.
Construction-level detail shall not be required;
            c.   A summary of the basis on which the applicant claims vested
rights;
            d.   The date on which the applicant claims that vested rights
accrued;
            e.   Any permit or fair notice application that was submitted on
the claimed date; and
            f.   A complete chronological history of the project for which
vested rights are claimed, including:
               (1)   A list of permits for development of the property, along
with supporting documents, that were issued or applied for after the date the
application claims that vested rights accrued;
               (2)   A description of any permitted or unpermitted development
that occurred on the property after the date the application claims that vested
rights accrued;
               (3)   A description of existing development on the property,
regardless of whether the development is permitted or unpermitted;
               (4)   A list of all annexations and zoning changes affecting the
property, if any;
               (5)   Any covenants, conditions, or restrictions recorded in the
deed records for the property; and
               (6)   Evidence of progress towards completion of the project
(see subsection 5.02.A.3).
         4.   Completeness review for vested rights petition. A vested rights
petition and associated permit are treated as a single application for purposes
of completeness review and expiration.
         5.   Vested rights determination.
            a.   Not later than ten business days after acceptance of a
complete vested rights petition, the Zoning Administrator shall review the
petition under subsection 5.02.B.6 and render a determination consistent with
the requirements of this subsection 5.02.
            b.   In acting on a petition, the Zoning Administrator may:
               (1)   Approve the petition and require the development
applications necessary to initiate, continue, or complete the project to be
reviewed in accordance with regulations in effect on the vesting date, except
for those regulations exempt from vesting under state law;
               (2)   Deny the petition and require the development application
associated with the project to be reviewed under current regulations of this
Zoning Ordinance; or
               (3)   Approve the petition in part, according to the provisions
of this subsection 5.02.
            c.   The Zoning Administrator may approve a petition in part if a
project is entitled to some, but not all, of the rights asserted in the
petition.
            d.   A vested rights determination may not waive or modify
applicable regulations or provide relief not required by Tex. Local Gov’t Code
Chapter 245 or § 43.002.
            e.   The Zoning Administrator shall provide a written determination
to the applicant, which must state:
               (1)   Whether the petition is approved or denied, in whole or in
part, and the basis for the decision;
               (2)   Findings of fact in support of the decision and
information sufficient to identify the permit or fair notice application on
which the petition is based; and
               (3)   If the petition is approved:
                  (a)   A description of the project for which vested rights
are recognized; and
                  (b)   A vesting date.
         6.   Criteria for approval. A vested rights determination under this
subsection does not affect the availability of a variance or other
administrative remedy authorized in Section 155.6 Zoning Relief Procedures.
            a.   Chapter 245 petition.
               (1)   General standard. A permit application is entitled to
development rights under Tex. Local Gov’t Code Chapter 245 if the permit is
required to initiate, continue, or complete a project for which a prior
application was submitted to the city. An application is not entitled to
development rights if it is unrelated to or inconsistent with the original
project, or if the original project has been completed, changed, or expired.
               (2)   Review criteria. In determining whether a petition meets
the standard for approval under this subsection, the Zoning Administrator shall
consider the following factors:
                  (a)   The nature and extent of proposed development shown on
the prior permit or other application that initiated the project for which
vested rights are claimed;
                  (b)   Whether the permit application submitted in connection
with the vested rights petition is related to and consistent with the original
project;
                  (c)   The nature and extent of prior development of the
property, including any permitting or construction activity that occurred
subsequent to the vesting date requested by the applicant;
                  (d)   Any prior vested rights determinations made for
development of the property; and
                  (e)   Whether the project has become dormant in accordance
with the provisions of this subsection 5.02.
               (3)   The criteria in this subsection 5.02.B.6.a are intended to
assist the Zoning Administrator in reviewing Tex. Local Gov’t Code Chapter 245
petitions, but do not limit the Zoning Administrator from considering other
factors relevant to the determination of rights for a particular project.
            b.   Continuing use petition.
               (1)   General standard. A permit application is entitled to use
rights under Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 43.002 to the extent that current
regulations would prohibit:
                  (a)   Continued use of the land in the manner in which it was
being used on the date that annexation proceedings were instituted, if the use
was legal at that time; or
                  (b)   Beginning to use land in the manner that was planned
before the 90th day before the effective date of the annexation if:
                     (i)   One or more licenses, certificates, permits,
approvals, or other forms of authorization by a governmental entity were
required by law for the planned land use; and
                     (ii)   A completed application for the initial
authorization was filed with the governmental entity before the date the
annexation proceedings were instituted.
               (2)   Review criteria.
                  (a)   In determining whether a petition meets the standard
for approval under this subsection , the Zoning Administrator shall consider
the nature and extent of development that:
                     (i)   Occurred on the property prior to initiation of
annexation proceedings, including photographs or other evidence substantiating
the use; or
                     (ii)   Was proposed in one or more required applications
that have been approved by a governmental entity.
                  (b)   The criteria in subsection 5.02.B.6.b are intended to
assist the Zoning Administrator in reviewing continuing use petitions, but do
not limit the Zoning Administrator from considering other factors relevant to
the determination of rights for a particular project.
         7.   Effect of vested rights determination. If the Zoning
Administrator approves a vested rights petition, any permit required to
initiate, continue, or complete the project shall be entitled to the
development or continuing use rights recognized by the vested rights
determination, unless the project becomes dormant under this subsection 5.02 or
other applicable regulations.
         8.   Administrative guidelines.
            a.   The Zoning Administrator may adopt guidelines to assist in
reviewing applications.
            b.   Guidelines adopted under this subsection 6.b for review of
vested rights petitions may be used to help address common questions that arise
in determining vested rights, including but not limited to:
               (1)   Whether a permit application is required to continue,
complete, or initiate the project for which vested rights are claimed;
               (2)   Whether the project for which vested rights are claimed
has been completed, changed, or expired; and
               (3)   Whether progress towards completion of a project has been
made under subsection 5.02.A.3.
               (4)   Guidelines adopted under this subsection 5.02.B.8.b shall
be posted on the city's website and made available to the public, but need not
be adopted by administrative rule.
         9.   Appeal of vested rights determination.
            (1)   Right to appeal. An applicant may appeal the Zoning
Administrator's decision on the application for vested rights determination to
the City Council. An appeal under this subsection 9 stays acceptance by filing
of any related development applications.
            (2)   Process. The application for appeal shall be made in writing
to the City Secretary and shall state the basis for requesting the appeal. The
appeal shall be made within ten business days of the date of the letter. The
City Secretary shall schedule a hearing before the City Council within 30
calendar days of the date the appeal is submitted.
            (3)   Appeal of Council decision. A person dissatisfied with the
decision of the City Council may appeal the decision to a court within Johnson
County. The person shall file the appeal with the court within 30 days of the
decision of the City Council. If no appeal is filed, the decision of the
Council shall be final.
   5.03.   Alternative Compliance.
      A.   Purpose and applicability.
         1.   Purpose.
            a.   This subsection 5.03 establishes a provision for alternative
compliance associated with the review and approval of a development, including
improvements to existing structures or site features, as required in subsection
5.03.A.2.
            b.   The purpose of the alternative compliance process is to ensure
that:
               (1)   A proposed development complies with the purpose and
intent of this Zoning Ordinance as stated in subsection 1.02;
               (2)   A proposed project meets requirements that are appropriate
for lots or sites and site-specific development challenges by applying a
flexible approval procedure. A development may be interpreted under this
subsection 5.03 to include redevelopment of lots or sites with existing
improvements and encumbrances that may pose unique challenges to complying with
the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance; and
               (3)   To allow for different standards that are in agreement
with the city's comprehensive plan and that produce a substantially equivalent
effect as the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
         2.   Applicability.
            a.   A request for alternative compliance, as specifically cited
within this Zoning Ordinance, may be submitted for review and approval along
with the site plan for a project, or along with the project's initial
development application (as applicable for the project).
            b.   Alternative compliance requests must be clearly delineated
graphically or in narrative format, as appropriate, on the site plan (or on the
project's initial development application), including a reference to the
specific section within this Zoning Ordinance that allows consideration of an
alternative standard (see Table 20: Approval for Alternative Compliance).
            c.   The applicable zoning district standards for a project shall
not be reduced or varied using the alternative compliance process unless the
standard is specifically cited as qualifying for alternative compliance in this
Zoning Ordinance.
            d.   Review and approval. Using the criteria listed in subsection
5.03.B, the Zoning Administrator will decide a request for alternative
compliance submitted for the following:
    Table 20: Approval for Alternative Compliance
 
Subsection Number Subsection Title
3.05              Location and arrangement of buildings
4.01.C            General landscaping requirements
4.05.B.6          Single-family detached residential and duplex design feature
                  elements
4.06.B.7          Alternative compliance for design standards
 
      B.   Alternative compliance evaluation criteria.
         1.   The requested alternative compliance standard is consistent with
the recommendations and policies of the city's comprehensive plan.
         2.   The proposed alternative standard does not reduce a standard
unless it is, to the greatest extent practical, equally mitigated or improved
by increasing the standards of other requirements.
         3.   The proposed standard does not attempt to modify the land uses
allowed in the zoning district in which the subject property is located, or to
add a land use not normally allowed in the zoning district.
      C.   Alternative compliance appeal.
         1.   The applicant may appeal the Zoning Administrator's decision
within 30 calendar days of the Zoning Administrator providing a written
decision to the applicant.
         2.   The appeal will be placed on the next available agenda of the
City Council. The City Council may either affirm, reverse, or modify the Zoning
Administrator's decision.
   5.04.   Public Hearings and Notification Requirements for Zoning-Related
Applications.
      A.   Applications requiring public hearing and notification for zoning-
related applications.
         1.   Request to change the zoning designation of a property or
district (rezoning or zoning change) see subsection 5.05;
         2.   An amendment to the text of this Zoning Ordinance, see subsection
5.05;
         3.   Request for a Planned Development District, see subsection 5.08;
         4.   Request for a specific use permit, see subsection 5.09;
         5.   Amortization of nonconforming uses, see subsection 5.10;
         6.   Appeal of zoning-related decisions, see subsection 6.01;
         7.   Variance from a zoning regulation, see subsection 6.02; and
         8.   Special exception from a zoning regulation, see subsection 6.03.
      B.   Review bodies and the associated public hearings per zoning
application type. Public hearings shall be conducted for each review body per
plan or application type according to the following table.
   Table 21: Review Bodies and the Associated Public Hearings per Zoning
Application Type
Application Type City Council Planning and Zoning Board of Adjustment
                              Commission
Application Type         City Council Planning and Zoning Board of Adjustment
                                      Commission
Rezoning                 Hearing      Hearing
Zoning text amendment    Hearing      Hearing
Planned Development      Hearing      Hearing
District
Specific use permit      Hearing      Hearing
Amortization of                                           Hearing
nonconforming uses
Appeal of zoning-related                                  Hearing
decision
Variance from zoning                                      Hearing
regulation
Special exception from                                    Hearing
zoning regulation
 
      C.   Required public notice for zoning-related plans and applications.
Public notices shall be required according to the following table.
   Table 22: Type of Notice Required
Application Type Published Notice Mailed Notice
Application Type                         Published Notice Mailed Notice
Rezoning                                 Required         Required
Zoning text amendment                    Required
Planned Development District             Required         Required
Specific use permit                      Required         Required
Amortization of nonconforming uses       Required         Required
Appeal of zoning-related decision        Required         Required
Variance from zoning regulation          Required         Required
Special exception from zoning regulation Required         Required
 
      D.   Types of notice.
         1.   Published notice and mailed notice of public hearings for zoning
changes involving real property.
            a.   Published notice.
               (1)   Notice of a public hearing to occur before the Planning
and Zoning Commission and City Council will include the purpose, time, and
place of the public hearing and will be published in the official newspaper of
the city before the 15th calendar day prior to the date of the public hearing
in accordance with Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 211.006.
               (2)   The notice must include a brief description of the
request, identification of the property that is subject to the request, and the
date, time, and location of the public hearing.
            b.   Mailed notice (also referred to as "written notice").
               (1)   Written notice of a public hearing to occur before the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall be sent to all owners of property, as
indicated by the most recently approved city tax roll, that is located within
the area of application and within 200 feet of the boundaries of the area
subject to the rezoning or SUP request.
               (2)   The written notice must be sent before the tenth calendar
day prior to the date of the public hearing and include a brief description of
the request, identification of the property that is subject to the request, and
the date, time, and location of the public hearing.
               (3)   Said written notice must be served by using the last known
address as listed on the most recently approved tax roll and depositing the
notice, postage paid, in the regular United States Mail.
               (4)   If written notice as required is not sent before the tenth
calendar day prior to the date of the public hearing, then the public hearing
must be delayed until this notice requirement is met.
         2.   "Published notice" of public hearing for text amendments.
            a.   For requests involving proposed changes to the text of the
zoning regulations, notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission and City
Council public hearing shall be accomplished by publishing the purpose, time,
and place of the public hearing in the official newspaper of the city before
the 15th calendar day prior to the date of the public hearing.
            b.   Changes in the zoning text that do not change zoning district
boundaries (i.e., that do not involve specific real property) do not require
mailed/written notification to individual property owners.
         3.   "Published notice" and "mailed notice" of Board of Adjustment
hearings.
            a.   For an appeal of a city administrative or interpretative
decision, consideration of a variance request, or consideration of a special
exception, the Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing,
give the public notice by written notice in the mail addressed to all owners of
real property located within 200 feet of the affected property, and by
publication of notice of such hearing in the city's official newspaper.
            b.   Both the written/mailed and published notice shall be given at
least ten days prior to the date for the hearing.
            c.   At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by attorney
or by agent.
         4.   Special notice. Pursuant to Tex. Local Gov’t Code §
211.007(d), the City Council may, by a two-thirds vote, prescribe the type of
notice to be given of the time and place of a public hearing held jointly by
the City Council and the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   5.05.   Zoning Text and Map Amendments.
      A.   Two types of zoning amendments.
         1.   Zoning Map amendment (rezoning).
            a.   A rezoning is a change or modification to the boundaries of
any zoning district shown on the City's Official Zoning District Map.
            b.   A zoning map amendment shall not zone any single lot into two
or more zoning districts.
         2.   Zoning text amendment. A text amendment changes the text of this
Zoning Ordinance and does not include changing or modification to the boundary
of any zoning district.
      B.   Approval authority and report requirement for zoning amendments.
         1.   City Council approval required. The City Council may, from time
to time, amend, supplement or change by ordinance the boundaries of zoning
districts or the text of this Zoning Ordinance.
         2.   Planning and Zoning Commission report required. Before taking
action on any proposed rezoning or text amendment, the City Council must
receive a report and a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission
concerning the proposed rezoning or text amendment.
      C.   Planning and Zoning Commission report and public hearing.
         1.   Pursuant to Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 211.007, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall make a preliminary report and hold a public hearing on
that report before submitting a final report to the City Council.
         2.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not hold a public
hearing until notice has been given consistent with subsection 5.04.
      D.   City Council public hearing required.
         1.   The City Council must hold a public hearing before approving or
adopting any proposed rezoning or text amendment.
         2.   The City Council shall not hold a public hearing until notice has
been given consistent with subsection 5.04.
         3.   Three-fourths City Council vote required. A rezoning request
shall not become effective except by a three-fourths vote of the full
membership of the City Council if either of the following is true:
            a.   The Planning and Zoning Commission votes to recommend denial
of the rezoning.
            b.   A written and signed protest against a proposed rezoning has
been filed before the date of the public hearing with the City Secretary for
any one of the following types of protesters:
               (1)   Interior protesters. The property owners, duly signed and
acknowledged, of 20% or more of the lots or land area included within a
proposed amendment boundary.
               (2)   Exterior protesters. The property owners, duly signed and
acknowledged, of 20% or more of the lots or land area within the public hearing
notification area.
      E.   Denial with prejudice. The City Council shall, unless otherwise
stated in the motion, make all denials of zoning changes with prejudice. If the
request is denied with prejudice, no additional application shall be accepted
which involves all or any part of the same property within a period a six
months after denial by the City Council, except;
         1.   At the request of the City Council; or
         2.   Upon written request by the applicant, the City Council may waive
the six month waiting period and permit a new application to be filed. Such
request for waiver shall not be set for a public hearing unless required by a
majority vote of the City Council; or
         3.   Where the property involved is temporarily classified to the IH,
Interim Holding District.
   5.06.   Certificate of Occupancy.
      A.   Certificate of occupancy required.
         1.   Certificate of occupancy shall be required for any of the
following:
            a.   Occupancy and use of land without a Building consistent with
the Use Chart, except for agricultural uses;
            b.   Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or
structurally altered;
            c.   Change in use of an existing building to a use of a different
classification;
            d.   Change in use of land to a use of a different classification;
            e.   Change in ownership of a business;
            f.   Any change in the use of a nonconforming use; and
            g.   Any use in existence with an annexation request.
         2.   Certificate of occupancy required from Building Official. No such
use, or change of use, shall take place until a certificate of occupancy has
been issued by the Building Official.
      B.   Procedure for new or altered buildings.
         1.   Written application. Written application for a certificate of
occupancy for a new building or for an existing building which is to be altered
may be made at the same time as the application for the building permit for
such building.
         2.   Timing of certificate issuance. A final certificate of occupancy
will not be issued prior to final inspection of the building.
   5.07.   Site Plan Requirements.
      A.   Purpose.
         1.   Through site plan review, the standards of this Zoning Ordinance,
subdivision regulations, other applicable sections of the City's Code of
Ordinances, and technical requirements such as building code, fire code, and
engineering design standards can be uniformly implemented by the city for
townhome, multi-family, and nonresidential uses.
         2.   The purpose of the site plan process is to:
            a.   Ensure compliance with adopted city development regulations
and other applicable regulations that apply to the property for which the city
has enforcement responsibility;
            b.   Promote safe, efficient and harmonious use of land through
application of city-adopted design standards and guidelines;
            c.   Promote the vision established by the comprehensive plan;
            d.   Ensure adequate public facilities to serve development;
            e.   Coordinate and document the design of public and private
improvements to be constructed;
            f.   Prevent or mitigate adverse development impacts, including
overcrowding and congestion;
            g.   Aid evaluation and coordination of land subdivision, including
the granting of easements, right-of-way, development agreements and provision
of surety;
            h.   Identify and address environmental concerns (floodplain,
drainage, trees, topography, etc.); and
            i.   Promote the public health, safety and welfare.
      B.   Applicability.
         1.   Processing and timing.
            a.   A site plan is required for an application for:
               (1)   Townhome and duplex development consisting of five or more
connected units;
               (2)   Multi-family development consisting of five or more units;
               (3)   Development in conjunction with a specific use permit
(SUP), unless the Zoning Administrator waives the requirement for a site plan;
and
               (4)   Any nonresidential use.
            b.   Site plans related to building permit applications. No
building permit shall be issued for any applicable developments or any
construction or development activity shall occur unless a site plan is first
approved by the Zoning Administrator or City Council (in the case of a specific
use permit (SUP)).
            c.   Exempted development. The following types of development are
exempted from the requirements of this subsection 5.07 Site Plan Requirements.
               (1)   Agricultural buildings;
               (2)   Single-family detached residential; and
               (3)   Temporary buildings as permitted by subsection 3.03 Use
Chart.
         2.   Public hearings. A public hearing on a site plan is not required
unless a site plan is prepared in conjunction with a specific use permit (SUP)
application.
         3.   Effect of approval.
            a.   No building permit or certificate of occupancy will be issued
unless all construction and development conforms to the site plan as approved
by the city.
               (1)   While the site plan remains valid (see subsection
5.07.B.3.b), the city shall not apply any additional requirements concerning
building placement, streets, drives, parking, landscaping or screening.
               (2)   Except where authorized by ordinance, a site plan may not
be used to approve a variance to development regulations.
               (3)   Where an approved plan conflicts with an adopted
regulation and no zoning variance or zoning special exception is expressly
approved, the regulation shall apply.
            b.   Site plan lapse.
               (1)   The approval of a site plan is effective for a period of
two years from the date of approval (see subsection 5.01.F).
               (2)   Expired site plans.
                  (a)   Upon expiration of a site plan, the applicant must
submit a new site plan subject to the then existing regulations.
                  (b)   Site plan approval shall expire upon completion of the
improvements shown on the plan. Permits must remain valid during the
construction process.
                  (c)   Subsequent additional development, site modifications
and redevelopment shall be considered a new project subject to the ordinances,
laws, and regulations in effect at the time additional development or
modifications are proposed.
      C.   Site plan required supporting documents. The following plans may be
required with a site plan application as determined by the Zoning
Administrator:
         1.   Dimensional control plan;
         2.   Façade plan or elevation drawings (see subsection 4.05 Design
Standards or subsection 4.06 Overlay Regulations);
         3.   Landscape plan (see subsection 4.01 Landscaping Requirements);
         4.   Final plat or replat;
         5.   Engineering plans or construction plans;
         6.   Fire lane plan or identifying fire lane locations and access per
Fire Code on the site plan;
         7.   Traffic impact analysis;
         8.   Flood study; or
         9.   Other approvals as required by ordinance or resolution (see
checklist provided by the Zoning Administrator).
      D.   Approval process. The Zoning Administrator will review an
application for a site plan consistent with subsection 5.01 above, including
the following specific procedures:
         1.   Upon receiving a completed application for a site plan (see
subsection 5.01.E Application Determination of Completeness), the Zoning
Administrator will distribute the site plan to the relevant city departments
and officials (as well as outside agencies, as appropriate); and
         2.   The Zoning Administrator will:
            a.   Approve the application for a site plan;
            b.   Consolidate all comments received into a single itemized list
and return the comments to the applicant with instructions for revising the
site plan; or
            c.   Deny the application consistent with state law, with a written
list of all items that are not in compliance with the regulations listed in
subsection 5.07.
         3.   The Zoning Administrator will process the resubmittal of an
application consistent with subsection 5.07.D.2 or, if there is a conflict
between subsection 5.07.D.2 and state law, as consistent with state law.
         4.   If an application or resubmittal satisfies all requirements of
regulations listed in subsection 5.07, the Zoning Administrator will issue
written approval of the application (see subsection 5.07.B.3 Effect of
Approval).
      E.   Revocation of site plan approval. The City Council may revoke
approval of a site plan if it determines that the conditions of the approval
have not been met or if the plan contains, or is based upon, incorrect
information or if it is determined that it was obtained using fraud or deceit.
   5.08.   Planned Development (PD) Process.
      A.   Planned Development (PD) steps for creation and development.
         1.   Pre-application conference.
            a.   Before submitting an application for a Planned Development
(PD) District, the applicant must provide the Zoning Administrator with an
informal PD design statement and PD concept plan drawn to approximate scale,
showing streets, lots, public areas, and other significant features.
            b.   The Zoning Administrator may require a pre-application
conference with the applicant to review the proposed PD design statement and PD
concept plan with other city departments.
         2.   PD application for rezoning.
            a.   Procedures and requirements.
               (1)   Unless modified by the Zoning Administrator in a manner
consistent with state law and the ordinance of the city, the Zoning
Administrator will process a PD application in accordance with the following
subsections:
                  (a)   Subsection 5.01 General Application Processing;
                  (b)   Subsection 5.04 Public Hearings and Notification
Requirements for Zoning-Related Applications; and
                  (c)   Subsection 5.05 Zoning Text and Map Amendments.
               (2)   The PD application shall consist of a PD design statement
and a PD concept plan.
               (3)   The Zoning Administrator may also require that the
applicant provide other supporting documents as necessary to meet the
submission requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
               (4)   The PD designation shall not be used solely to obtain
zoning variances from development standards.
            b.   PD design statement. The PD design statement shall be a
written report consisting of at least the following elements:
               (1)   Title of PD or development;
               (2)   List of property owners and developers, including proposed
developers that may be involved in later phases of the PD;
               (3)   Statement of the general location and relationship to
adjoining land uses, both existing and proposed;
               (4)   Selection of one conventional zoning district as a base
zoning district to regulate all uses and development regulations not identified
as being modified (multiple base zoning districts may be selected to
accommodate a mixture of land uses in different geographic areas);
               (5)   A description of the proposed sequence of development;
               (6)   Documents, tables, maps, or other description of the PD
concept plan, including the following:
                  (a)   Description of land use zones, including open space
areas and density of proposed residential areas;
                  (b)   Approximate allocation or proportion of land uses
proposed;
                  (c)   Proposed transportation network including typical
street sections, medians, sidewalks, trails, and paths and their relationship
to adopted city transportation plans;
                  (d)   Proposed connections to existing city transportation
corridors;
                  (e)   Proposed stormwater management areas, including number
of acres in the drainage area and delineation of applicable flood levels;
                  (f)   General description of building types and architectural
and design requirements;
                  (g)   Any proposed regulations or restrictions not found in
this Zoning Ordinance for the proposed base zoning district as well as any
requested variances or waivers;
                  (h)   A conceptual scaled layout of lots and buildings;
                  (i)   The following physical characteristics: elevation,
slope analysis, soil characteristics, tree cover, and drainage information;
                  (j)   A topographic map with minimum five foot contour
intervals; and
                  (k)   A statement of utility lines and services to be
installed, including lines to be dedicated to the city and which will remain
private.
               (7)   The Zoning Administrator may require that the applicant
prepare a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) report in order to assist the city in
determining whether the PD will be supported with adequate levels of roadways
and intersections concurrent with the demand created by the PD, and provide
recommendations for addressing any roadways that are currently inadequate to
support the impacts of the PD.
            c.   PD concept plan.
               (1)   The PD concept plan is a graphic representation of the
development plan for the PD.
               (2)   In addition to the items listed in subsection 5.08.A.2.b
(6), the PD concept plan should depict the entire PD at build-out and depict
the integration of the proposed phases of the PD, as applicable, with
surrounding development, including relationship between land uses, open space,
transportation connections, schools and other public facilities, employment
centers, retail, and other services.
               (3)   The Zoning Administrator may create a checklist of all
items required for a complete PD concept plan and may waive or require any
additional items based on the nature and scale of the proposed PD.
            d.   Effect of approval.
               (1)   The City Council may approve the PD on the condition that
the applicant execute a development agreement or other mechanism approved by
the City Attorney to upgrade or extend public facilities such as water,
wastewater, stormwater, roadway, parks and trails, or other facilities directly
impacted by development of the PD.
               (2)   Upon final approval by the City Council, the PD will
become a part of the Official Zoning District Map.
               (3)   The ordinance shall adopt the PD design statement, PD
concept plan, and other relevant supporting materials, and these materials will
become a part of the official records of the city.
               (4)   The ordinance adopting the PD shall control the use and
development of the property, and all building permits and development requests
shall be in accordance with the plan unless the PD is modified by City Council
(see subsection 5.08.C).
               (5)   City Council approval of the PD District, PD design
statement, and PD concept plan is required prior to approval of any plat, site
plan, or other development permit within the PD.
      B.   Expiration and extension of PD.
         1.   If, after two years from the date of approval of a PD, no
progress towards completion has been made within the PD consistent with one or
more actions listed in subsection 5.02.A.3, the PD design statement and PD
concept plan will expire.
         2.   The property will remain zoned as PD on the Official Zoning
District Map, but the PD design statement and PD concept plan will no longer be
valid.
         3.   If the PD expires, a new PD design statement and PD concept plan
must be submitted and approved by City Council prior to approval of any plat or
site plan on the property.
         4.   The Zoning Administrator may grant a two year extension of
validity for the PD design statement and PD concept plan. At the end of the two
year extension, a second extension may be granted by the Zoning Administrator
for up to one year.
         5.   An extension shall be granted if a development application for
the PD has been submitted and is undergoing the development review process or
if the Zoning Administrator determines that the project has demonstrated
progress towards completion consistent with or more actions listed in
subsection 5.02.A.3.
      C.   PD modifications.
         1.   Minor PD amendment and adjustment. The City Manager's designee
may approve or defer a minor amendment to City Council provided all of the
following conditions are satisfied:
            a.   The project boundaries are not altered;
            b.   Uses are not being modified or removed from the PD;
            c.   The allocation of land to particular uses is not modified by
more than 10% and the relationship of uses within the project is not
substantially altered;
            d.   The density of housing is not increased more than 10%;
            e.   Gross floor area is not increased or decreased by more than
10%;
            f.   The number and quality of amenities are not reduced;
            g.   The amount of open space and trails is not reduced by more
than 5% and access to open space and trails is not reduced, either through
creation of physical access barriers, removing linkages or physical access
points, or by modifying the placement of uses and buildings relative to the
open space.
         2.   City Manager's designee approval.
            a.   Upon receiving a request to modify an approved PD, the City
Manager's designee will determine if proposed amendments to an approved PD
satisfy the above criteria listed in subsection 5.08.C.1.
            b.   If the City Manager's designee determines that the criteria
listed in subsection 5.08.C.1 are not satisfied, an application for an amended
PD shall be submitted for full review and approval according to the procedures
set forth in this subsection 5.08.
   5.09.   Specific Use Permit (SUP).
      A.   General description and authorization.
         1.   The uses listed under the various districts as "S" in the Use
Chart require approval of a specific use permit (SUP) prior to approval of a
certificate of occupancy.
         2.   With consideration given to setting, physical features,
compatibility with surrounding land uses, traffic, and aesthetics, the City
Council may authorize an SUP for a use indicated by "S" in the Use Chart if the
Council finds that the use as approved is compatible with existing or planned
land uses.
      B.   Application. Application and public hearing procedures for an SUP
are consistent with the following subsections:
         1.   Subsection 5.01 General Application Processing;
         2.   Subsection 5.04 Public Hearings and Notification Requirements for
Zoning-Related Applications;
         3.   Subsection 5.05 Zoning Text and Map Amendments;
         4.   Subsection 5.07 Site Plan Requirements, unless waived by the
Zoning Administrator.
      C.   Criteria for specific permit approval.
         1.   Specific use permit criteria. The City Council shall use the
following criteria to evaluate an SUP:
            a.   Whether the proposed use shall be in harmony with the policies
of the comprehensive plan.
            b.   Whether the proposed use shall be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of the applicable zoning district regulations.
            c.   Whether the proposed use shall not adversely affect the use of
neighboring properties.
            d.   Whether the proposed use shall not generate pedestrian and
vehicular traffic that is hazardous or in conflict with the existing and
anticipated traffic in the neighborhood.
            e.   Whether utility, drainage, parking, loading, signs, lighting
access and other necessary public facilities to serve the proposed use shall
meet the adopted codes of the city.
         2.   Specific conditions. In granting an SUP, the City Council may
impose conditions, including limits of time, which shall be complied with by
the owner or grantee before a certificate of occupancy may be issued by the
Building Official for use of the building on such property pursuant to such
SUP; and such conditions may not be construed as conditions precedent to the
granting of the certificate of occupancy.
         3.   Compliance with written requirements. No SUP shall be granted
unless the applicant, owner and grantee of the SUP accepts and agrees to be
bound by and comply with the written requirements of the SUP and any conditions
and supporting materials approved and adopted by City Council, including, but
not limited to, the site plan and other conditions and restrictions approved by
the City Council.
         4.   Expiration of SUP.
            a.   Following approval, an SUP may continue in operation and be
transferred between owners, operators, or businesses at the same location
unless one or more of the conditions listed in subsection 5.09.C.4.b is
present.
            b.   An SUP will expire under one or more of the following
conditions:
               (1)   The applicant does not apply for a building permit within
one year from the time the SUP is approved;
               (2)   The building, premise, or use associated with the SUP is
voluntarily vacated or abandoned for a period of six months or longer;
               (3)   The building, premise, or use associated with the SUP is
destroyed to an extent that is 50% or less of the most recent appraised value
by fire or other cause, and the building, premise, or use is not reconstructed
or reestablished within one year of the occurrence of the event that destroyed
the building, premise, or use; or
               (4)   The building, premise, or use associated with the SUP is
destroyed to an extent greater than 50% of the most recent appraised value by
fire or other cause.
            c.   The City Council, upon recommendation of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, may approve a request to delay expiration of an SUP by up to
one year.
            d.   If the SUP expires under any scenario listed in subsection
5.09.C.4.b, a new SUP must be approved prior to a certificate of occupancy
being issued on the property.
         5.   Modification of SUP.
            a.   No building, premise, or use associated with the SUP may be
enlarged, modified, structurally altered, or otherwise significantly changed
unless City Council approves a modification to the SUP according to the
procedures listed in subsection 5.09.B.
            b.   Any person possessing an SUP that is found to be in violation
of this Zoning Ordinance, another ordinance of the city, or the conditions
associated with the SUP must, upon notification by the city, cease the
violation within 30 days or modify the SUP consistent with this subsection
5.09.
            c.   If a violation does not cease following notice given by the
city, the City Council is authorized, by a simple majority vote, to suspend or
revoke the SUP.
         6.   The Board of Adjustment shall not have jurisdiction to hear,
review, reverse, or modify any decision, determination, or ruling with respect
to the granting extension, revocation, or modification or any other action
taken relating to such SUP.
   5.10.   Amortization of Nonconforming Uses.
      A.   City Council initiation of amortization case. The City Council, by
majority vote, may request that the Board of Adjustment consider establishing a
compliance date for a nonconforming use.
      B.   Board of Adjustment decision.
         1.   Once requested by the City Council, the Board of Adjustment may
require the discontinuance of a nonconforming use under any plan whereby the
full value of the use's structure and facilities can be amortized within a
definite period of time, taking into consideration the general character of the
neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to the zoning
regulations.
         2.   The value of any structures and facilities that are configured
for use by a conforming use in the zoning district where the property is
located may be excluded from the determination of a reasonable amortization
period.
         3.   All actions to discontinue a nonconforming use shall be taken
with due regard for the property rights of the persons affected when considered
in the light of the public welfare, the character of the area surrounding the
nonconforming use, and the goal of conservation and preservation of conforming
properties.
      C.   Public hearing process.
         1.   The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing to determine
whether continued operation of the nonconforming use is in the public interest.
Any interested party may submit testimony or evidence either for or against
amortization.
         2.   Upon receiving a request from the City Council, the Zoning
Administrator shall schedule a public hearing before the Board of Adjustment.
         3.   In determining whether the continued operation is in the public
interest, the Board of Adjustment shall consider the following factors:
            a.   The character of the surrounding neighborhood;
            b.   The degree of incompatibility of the use with the zoning
district in which it is located;
            c.   The manner in which the use is being conducted;
            d.   The hours of operation of the use;
            e.   The extent to which continued operation of the use may
threaten public health or safety;
            f.   The environmental impacts of the use's operation, including
but not limited to the impacts of noise, glare, dust, and odor;
            g.   The extent to which public disturbances and nuisances may be
created or perpetuated by continued operation of the use;
            h.   The extent to which traffic or parking problems may be created
or perpetuated by continued operation of the use;
            i.   Any other factors relevant to the issue of whether continued
operation of the use will adversely affect nearby properties;
            j.   The extent the nonconforming use impacts the value and
marketability of the abutting and surrounding properties or neighborhood;
            k.   Whether the property is readily suitable for development or
operation of a conforming use.
         4.   If the Board of Adjustment determines that cessation of the
nonconforming use is in the public interest, the Board of Adjustment shall,
consistent with state law, provide a compliance date for the nonconforming use
under a plan whereby the owner's actual investment in the use before the time
that the use became nonconforming can be amortized within a reasonable time
period. The following factors shall be considered by the Board of Adjustment in
determining a reasonable amortization period:
            a.   The owner's capital investment in structures, fixed equipment,
and other assets (excluding inventory and other assets that may be feasibly
transferred to another site and excluding structures, fixed equipment, and
other assets that are readily suitable for use by a conforming use) on the
property before the time the use became nonconforming;
            b.   Any costs that are reasonably and directly attributable to
accomplishing the ordered compliance date, including demolition expenses,
relocation expenses, termination of leases, and discharge of mortgages;
            c.   Any return on investment since inception of the use, including
net income and depreciation;
            d.   The anticipated annual recovery of investment, including net
income and depreciation;
            e.   A reasonable closeout and termination period for the
nonconforming use.
         5.   The Board of Adjustment may request financial documentation from
the owner relating to the factors listed.
         6.   If the owner does not provide documentation, the Board of
Adjustment is authorized to make its determination of a compliance date based
upon any reasonably available public records as well as testimony at the public
hearing.
         7.   Failure by owner to provide the requested financial documents and
records shall not prevent the Board of Adjustment from setting a compliance
date.
      D.   Ceasing operations. If the Board of Adjustment establishes a
compliance date for a nonconforming use, the use must cease operations on that
date and it may not operate thereafter unless it becomes a conforming use.
      E.   Definition. For purposes of this subsection 5.10, OWNER means the
owner of the nonconforming use at the time of the Board of Adjustment's
determination of a compliance date for the nonconforming use.
      F.   Finality of decisions.
         1.   Decision to deny a request to establish a compliance date. A
decision by the Board of Adjustment to deny a request to establish a compliance
date is final unless appealed by an aggrieved party to district court within
ten calendar days.
         2.   Decision setting a compliance date. A decision by the Board of
Adjustment setting a compliance date is final unless appealed by an aggrieved
party to district court within ten calendar days.
(Ord. 04-2022-34, passed 4-12-22)
   5.11.   Concept Plans
      A.   Purpose. The purpose of a concept plan is to provide City Council an
opportunity to consider various development related aspects of a proposed
development at the rezoning phase prior to any plat or site plan submittal.
Concept plans are intended to determine how a future project could conform to
the city’s zoning code, Future Land Use Plan, subdivision code, Master
Thoroughfare Plan, and other applicable plans and regulations. Approval of a
concept plan shall not allow development to reduce the minimum requirements for
the requested zoning district and shall not constitute approval of any variance
or deviation to the minimum requirements of the zoning code.
      B.   Applicability.
         1.   Approval of a concept plan is required for every proposed planned
development, in accordance with subsection 5.08.
         2.   For all other zoning requests, approval of a concept plan is
encouraged for any property that is intended for development, subject to the
requirements listed in subsection 5.11.C below.
      C.   Content.
         1.   A concept plan that is voluntarily submitted shall, at a minimum,
contain adequate information to address the evaluation criteria listed in
subsection 5.11.D.
         2.   An application for a concept plan shall provide the following:
            a.   Payment of the application fee of $45;
            b.   Letter of intent providing a narrative of the proposal; and
            c.   Conceptual representation of each proposed use and a
generalized representation of proposed site improvements.
         3.   An applicant for a concept plan is encouraged to include any of
the following information that may be helpful in assessing the impacts of the
proposed development:
            a.   Conceptual representation of vehicular and pedestrian impacts
to neighboring properties, including proposed connections to existing and
planned driveways and roadways;
            b.   Conceptual representation of vehicular and pedestrian
circulation within the site, including right-of-way widths or proposed street
sections up to the connection with the public right-of-way;
            c.   Identification of all areas to be dedicated to the city or to
have public easements, such as open space and drainage areas;
            d.   Proposed number of dwelling units, which may be a range or
expressed in overall density, the total acreage for residential uses, and the
approximate square footage of buildings, by type, for non-residential uses;
            e.   Location and type of proposed screening between the site and
all adjacent property;
            f.   Indication of boundary or size of each phase of development,
if separate phases are proposed;
            g.   Description of how essential public services, including water,
sewer, and drainage, will be provided;
            h.   General location of the proposed parking areas;
            i.   A graphic rendering of the existing site conditions, which
depicts significant natural, topographical and physical features of the subject
property including contours, location of water features and floodplain on or
affecting the subject property, and existing drainage patterns;
            j.   Vicinity map (does not need to be scaled) indicating the area
in which the property is located; and
            k.   Other information the applicant and/or owner might wish to
include.
      D.   Review criteria. When considering a concept plan included with a
zoning request, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council may
consider the following criteria:
         1.   Conformance with the natural site topography and landforms,
including natural drainage patterns and floodplain boundaries;
         2.   The impact of the proposed development on the safety,
convenience, and ease of vehicular traffic flow and pedestrian movement to and
from the site;
         3.   The impact of the proposed development on existing streets,
utilities, parks, schools, and other public facilities;
         4.   The impact of the proposed development on adjacent land uses and
the surrounding area;
         5.   Conformance with all applicable city requirements and
regulations.
      E.   Expiration and extension of concept plan.
         1.   If no progress towards completion of the project has been made
following approval of a concept plan, as progress is defined in subsection
5.02.A.3, the concept plan shall expire after two years from the date of
approval or the most recent action as defined in subsection 5.02.A.3.
         2.   The property will remain zoned as approved on the Official Zoning
District Map, but the concept plan will no longer be valid.
         3.   If the concept plan expires, a new concept plan meeting the
minimum requirements of the zoning district and the criteria listed in
subsection 5.11.C must be submitted and approved by City Council prior to
approval of any plat or site plan on the property. City Council may, if
requested by the applicant following expiration of the concept plan, vote to
allow the property to develop without an approved concept plan and be subject
to the minimum requirements of this code.
         4.   The City Manager's Designee may grant a two year extension of
validity for the concept plan. At the end of the two year extension, a second
extension may be granted by the City Manager's Designee for up to one year.
      F.   Concept plan modifications. Modifications to the concept plan
require approval by City Council, unless approved as an administrative
amendment.
         1.   Administrative amendment. The City Manager's Designee may approve
or defer an administrative amendment to City Council as follows:
            a.   Additions to buildings shown or described on the concept plan,
which do not increase the gross floor area of all buildings collectively by
more than 10%;
            b.   Minor relocation or reorientation of buildings, lot lines and/
or easements;
            c.   Relocation of points of access, if such relocation will not
hinder traffic circulation on adjacent public rights of way as determined by
the city's engineer. If access points were previously determined by an approved
Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA), the City Manager's Designee may require that an
updated TIA be submitted that provides analysis of the modified access points;
            d.   Relocation of internal access and circulation that does not
impact access or traffic flow to and from streets that are external to the
development;
            e.   Relocation or rearrangement of parking areas where the overall
supply of parking is not substantially altered;
            f.   Reduction of established square footage or density
limitations;
            g.   Increase of landscaping or building setbacks;
            h.   Relocation of or increase in open space if the change furthers
the goals of this ordinance or the city's adopted Parks Master Plan; and
            i.   Modification of the location or size of proposed structural
stormwater controls based on an engineered stormwater design.
         2.   City Manager's Designee approval.
            a.   Upon receiving a request to modify an approved concept plan,
the City Manager's Designee will determine if proposed amendments to an
approved concept plan satisfy the above criteria listed in subsection 5.11.F.1.
            b.   City Council approval of a new or modified concept plan may be
required if the proposed development layout, character, or other conditions
affecting the development are substantially altered, as determined by the City
Manager's Designee.
            c.   The City Manager's Designee shall determine whether a request
for amendment shall be approved administratively, or defer the decision to City
Council at its next available meeting, within 30 days of receiving a request
for amendment of the concept plan.
(Ord. 04-2022-34, passed 4-12-22; Am. Ord. 02-2023-09, passed 2-28-23; Am. Ord.
10-2023-74, passed 10-24-23; Am. Ord. 03-2025-11, passed 3-25-25)
§ 155.6 ZONING RELIEF PROCEDURES.
   6.01.   Zoning Regulation Appeal.
      A.   Types of appeals. Table 23: Review Bodies and the Associated Public
Hearings per Zoning Application Type summarizes the types of appeals contained
within this Zoning Ordinance.
   Table 23: Review Bodies and the Associated Public Hearings per Zoning
Application Type
 
Application Type        City Council Board of Adjustment District Court or
                                                         County Court
Appeal of
administrative decision
related to building
permit, site plan,                   Appeal
certificate of
occupancy, or
nonconforming use
Appeal of
administrative decision Appeal
related to alternative
compliance
Appeal of Board of                                       Appeal
Adjustment decision
Appeal of vested rights
determination by Zoning Appeal
Administrator
 
      B.   Appeal of a city administrative or interpretative decision.
         1.   Any person, department, board, or bureau of the city affected by
any administrative officer acting pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance regulations
must submit written appeal to the Board of Adjustment within 20 calendar days
of the decision, unless specified elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance or by
state law.
         2.   In exercising its authority herein, the Board of Adjustment may
reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the city administrative
official's order, requirement, decision, or determination from which an appeal
is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or determination,
and for that purpose the Board has the same authority as the city's
administrative official.
         3.   Public hearings shall be held in accordance with subsection 5.04
above.
      C.   Appeals procedure to the City Council or Board of Adjustment.
         1.   Timing and fee. Appeal to the City Council or Board of Adjustment
shall be made consistent with the time and manner specified in this Zoning
Ordinance and with state law by filing with the City Secretary a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof.
         2.   Appeal stays proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator or
Building Official certifies in writing that a stay would cause imminent peril
to life or property.
      D.   Appeals procedure to district court.
         1.   Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any
decision of the Board of Adjustment may present to a court of record, a
petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole
or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality. Such petitions shall be
presented to the court within ten calendar days after the filing of the
decision in the office of the Board of Adjustment.
         2.   The appeal must be in writing and specify the decision of the
Board of Adjustment and grounds of such appeal.
         3.   Costs shall not be allowed against the Board unless it shall
appear to the court that it acted with gross negligence, or in bad faith, or
with malice in making the decision appealed from.
   6.02.   Zoning Variance.
      A.   Purpose.
         1.   The Board of Adjustment is authorized in specific cases to grant
a variance from this Zoning Ordinance.
         2.   A variance is authorized by this Zoning Ordinance when such cases
are shown not to be contrary to the public interest if, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will
result in an undue hardship and so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be
observed and substantial justice done.
         3.   The Board of Adjustment is not authorized to grant a variance
that will allow a use not authorized in the Use Chart or modify the standards
or conditions of a PD zoning district or SUP.
      B.   Zoning variance applicability. The Board of Adjustment is authorized
to grant a variance from the following regulations consistent with this
subsection 6.02:
         1.   Open space (yard) dimensions;
         2.   Lot dimensions;
         3.   Floor area;
         4.   Structure height;
         5.   Lot coverage.
      C.   Criteria for approval. The Board of Adjustment may not grant a
variance without first having given public notice and having held a public
hearing on the variance request in accordance with subsection 5.04 above and
this subsection 6.02.C.
         1.   Findings of fact. The Board of Adjustment may grant a variance if
the Board finds affirmatively that the following are true:
            a.   Due to special conditions that affect the subject property, an
unnecessary hardship will result from a literal interpretation of the
regulation that is the subject of the variance request;
            b.   The hardship is unique to the subject property in that it is
not commonly found on similar properties in the immediate vicinity;
            c.   The hardship is inherent to the property and is not self-
created;
            d.   The variance is not contrary to the public interest;
            e.   The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment
of a substantial property right of the applicant;
            f.   The variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent
of this Zoning Ordinance;
            g.   Public health, safety, and welfare will be secured; and
            h.   Substantial justice will be done.
         2.   Contextual factors in making determination. In making the
findings listed in subsection 6.02.C.1, the Board of Adjustment may consider
the following grounds to determine whether compliance with this Zoning
Ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship:
            a.   The nature of the proposed use of the land involved;
            b.   The existing uses of land in the vicinity;
            c.   Whether the financial cost of compliance with the regulation
as written is greater than 50% of the appraised value of the structure as shown
on the most recent appraisal roll certified to the assessor for the city under
Tex. Tax Code § 26.01;
            d.   Whether compliance with the regulation as written would result
in a loss to the lot on which the structure is located of at least 25% of the
area on which development may physically occur;
            e.   Whether compliance with the regulation as written would result
in the structure violating a different requirement of a city ordinance,
building code, or other requirement;
            f.   Whether compliance with the regulation as written would result
in the unreasonable encroachment on an adjacent property or easement;
            g.   Whether the structure is a nonconforming structure under
subsection 3.07;
            h.   The probable effect the variance will have upon conditions of
public health, safety, convenience, and welfare; or
            i.   Whether the granting of the variance will adversely affect the
ability of adjacent property to develop or will prevent the orderly use of
adjacent property.
         3.   Record of findings. Such findings of the Board of Adjustment,
together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be
incorporated into the official minutes of Board of Adjustment meeting at which
the variance is considered.
         4.   Conditions of approval. In granting a variance, the Board of
Adjustment may prescribe conditions that it deems necessary to preserve the
public interest.
      D.   Concurring vote of 75% required. Pursuant to Tex. Local Gov’t Code §
211.009(c), the concurring vote of 75% of the members of the Board of
Adjustment is necessary for the Board to grant a variance.
      E.   Zoning variance denial. No request for a variance that has been
denied shall be further considered by the board under a subsequent request
unless:
         1.   Six months have elapsed from the date of denial; or
         2.   Conditions relative to other property in the immediate vicinity,
within the said six months period, have been changed or acted on by the board
or council so as to alter the facts and conditions on which the previous board
action was based.
   6.03.   Zoning Special Exception.
      A.   Purpose. The Board of Adjustment is authorized to hear and decide a
special exception in accordance with this subsection 6.03.
      B.   Zoning special exception defined. A special exception is an allowed
variation from the regulations of this Zoning Ordinance, but is differentiated
from a variance by the following:
         1.   No hardship required. A special exception does not require a
finding of an unnecessary hardship.
         2.   Specifically allowed and pre-determined by the Zoning Ordinance.
Approval of a special exception by the Board of Adjustment is specifically
provided for and defined in this Zoning Ordinance.
      C.   Requests for a zoning special exception. The Board of Adjustment may
grant a special exception upon receiving a written request from the property
owner or authorized agent.
      D.   Zoning special exception authorized. If the Board of Adjustment
finds that the public convenience and welfare will be substantially served and
the appropriate use of the neighboring property will not be substantially
injured, the Board of Adjustment may authorize the following special exceptions
to the regulations herein established:
         1.   Nonconforming uses. Permit the reconstruction, extension, or
enlargement of a building occupied by a nonconforming use on the lot or tract
occupied by such building provided such reconstruction does not prevent the
return of such property to a conforming use and permit the expansion of off-
street parking or off-street loading for a nonconforming use.
         2.   Building setbacks. For existing buildings that were legally
constructed prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, the Board of
Adjustment may authorize a special exception to allow reconstruction of a
building over a setback line or allow a building to be set back further than a
build-to line established by this Zoning Ordinance.
         3.   Cell tower height.
            a.   The Board of Adjustment may approve a special exception for an
antenna support structure that exceeds 35 feet in height if the structure is
set back an additional foot from the minimum required setback for each foot in
height above 35 feet to a maximum height of 65 feet.
            b.   Only one antenna facility exceeding 35 feet in height is
permitted on each lot.
         4.   Landscaping. The Board of Adjustment may permit landscaping that
varies by more than 10% from the requirements of subsection 4.01.
      E.   Approval conditions. In granting a special exception, the Board of
Adjustment may impose such conditions as are necessary to protect adjacent
property owners and to ensure the public health, safety and general welfare,
including but not limited to conditions specifying the period during which a
nonconforming use may continue to operate or exist before being brought into
conformance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
      F.   Concurring vote of 75% required. Pursuant to Tex. Local Gov’t Code §
211.009(c), the concurring vote of 75% of the members of the Board of
Adjustment is necessary to grant a special exception.
      G.   Zoning special exception denial. No request for a zoning special
exception that has been denied shall be further considered by the board under a
subsequent request unless:
         1.   Six months have elapsed from the date of denial; or
         2.   Conditions relative to other property in the immediate vicinity,
within the said six month period, have been changed or acted on by the board or
council so as to alter the facts and conditions on which the previous board
action was based.
(Ord. 04-2022-34, passed 4-12-22)
§ 155.7 ZONING DEFINITIONS.
   7.01.   Standard Zoning Definitions.
      Words and terms not expressly defined in this section are to be construed
according to the normally accepted meaning of such words or terms or, where no
definition appears, according to their customary usage in the practice of
municipal planning and engineering.
      ABANDONMENT. To cease or discontinue a use or activity other than short-
term interruptions to a use or activity during periods of remodeling,
maintaining, or otherwise improving or rearranging a facility, or during normal
periods of vacation or seasonal closure.
      ABUTTING. Adjacent, adjoining, and contiguous to. It may also mean having
a lot line in common with a right-of-way or easement, or with a physical
improvement such as a street, waterline, park, or open space.
      ACCESS. A means of approaching or entering a property, or the ability to
traverse a property (such as in the use of the phrase "pedestrian access
easement").
      ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building incidental to the main
structure.
      ACCESSORY USE. A use that is clearly and customarily incidental and
secondary to the principal use of land or building(s), and that is located upon
the same lot, and that does not change the character thereof. The land/building
area that is used for the accessory use is significantly less than that used
for the principal use.
      ADULT DAY-CARE SERVICES. A facility that provides services on a daily or
regular basis, but not overnight, to four or more elderly or handicapped
persons who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner of the
facility.
      AGRICULTURAL USE. Land where the production, keeping, or maintenance for
sale, lease, or personal use of plants and animals useful to man, including,
forages and sod crops, grains and seed crops, dairy animals, poultry and
livestock, including but not limited to ostriches, emus, buffalos, beef cattle,
sheep, goats, mules, horses and ponies.
      AIRPORT or AIRPORT FACILITY. A complex of runways and buildings for the
takeoff, landing, and maintenance of aircrafts, with facilities for passengers.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES AND SERVICE (ON-SITE CONSUMPTION). An
establishment operated within a restaurant, stadium, or other facility that
offers alcoholic beverages, either mixed or unmixed, consisting of distilled
spirits, wine, beer, or other alcoholic beverages for sale and consumption on
the premises.
      ALCOHOL SALES (OFF-PREMISES CONSUMPTION). An establishment principally
for the retail sale of sealed containers of beer and wine for consumption off-
premises. For this definition, alcoholic beverage as defined by the Tex.
Alcoholic Beverage Code means alcohol, or any beverage containing more than
one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of use for
beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted.
      ALLEY. A public right-of-way, not intended to provide the primary means
of access to abutting lots, that is used primarily for vehicular service access
to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
      ALTERNATIVE FINANCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. A check cashing business, money
transfer business, payday advance or loan business, or title loan business, or
any business that provides capital at a high rate of interest with a short
repayment period measured most accurately measured in days or weeks to
leveraged consumers having no other source of capital. An ALTERNATIVE FINANCIAL
ESTABLISHMENT does not include state or federally chartered banks, community
development financial institutions, savings and loans, and credit unions.
      AMBULANCE SERVICE. A facility for the dispatch, storage and maintenance
of emergency medical care vehicles.
      AMORTIZATION. Discontinuance of a nonconforming use of land or structure
under any plan whereby the full value of the structure and facilities can be
recovered within a definite period of time and the property or use can be made
to conform to the regulations of this Zoning Ordinance.
      AMUSEMENT, COMMERCIAL (INDOORS). An amusement enterprise wholly enclosed
in a building that is treated acoustically so that noise generated by the
enterprise is not perceptible at the bounding property line and including, but
not limited to, a climbing wall center, laser tag, video arcade, trampoline
park, go-kart track, or billiard parlor.
      AMUSEMENT, COMMERCIAL (OUTDOORS). An amusement enterprise offering
entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee or charge
wherein any portion of the activity takes place in the open including, but not
limited to, a golf driving range, archery range, miniature golf course,
carnival, riding stables, or race tracks.
      ANIMAL SHELTER or PET BOARDING (WITH OUTSIDE YARD/KENNELS). Facility with
a fenced yard or outside kennels in which three or more dogs, cats, or other
domestic animals are held for adoption or accepted for boarding for which
payment is received. Sometimes referred to as "doggy day care" or a "pet
hotel".
      ANIMAL SHELTER or PET BOARDING (WITHOUT OUTSIDE YARD/KENNELS). Facility
entirely indoors in which three or more dogs, cats, or other domestic animals
are held for adoption or accepted for boarding for which payment is received.
Sometimes referred to as "doggy day care" or a "pet hotel".
      ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURES.
         a.   MONOPOLE ANTENNA STRUCTURE. A self-supporting pole type structure
with no guy wire support, tapering from base to top and so designed to support
fixtures that hold one or more antennas and related equipment for wireless
telecommunication transmission.
         b.   LATTICE ANTENNA STRUCTURE. A steel lattice, self-supporting
structure with no guy wire support, so designed to support fixtures that hold
one or more antennas and related equipment for wireless communication
transmission.
         c.   GUYED LATTICE ANTENNA STRUCTURE. A steel lattice, guy wire
supported structure, so designed to support fixtures that hold one or more
antennas and related equipment for wireless communication transmission.
      ANTIQUE SHOP. An establishment offering for sale, within a building,
articles such as glass, china, furniture or similar furnishing and decorations
that have value and significance due to age, design, and sentiment.
      APARTMENT. A building, or portion of a building, designed for occupancy
by three or more households living independently of each other where each
household occupies one or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities
comprising an independent self-contained dwelling unit not owned in fee simple.
      APPLICANT. The person or entity responsible for the submission of an
application. The APPLICANT must be the actual owner of the property for which
an application is submitted, or a duly authorized representative of the
property owner. Also see DEVELOPER.
      APPLICATION. The package of materials, including but not limited to an
application form, completed checklist, tax certificate, drawings or studies,
and other informational materials, that is required by the city to initiate
city review and approval of a development project.
      APPLICATION FORM. The written form (as provided by and as may be amended
by the Zoning Administrator) that is filled out and executed by the applicant
and submitted to the city along with other required materials as a part of an
application.
      APPROVAL.
         a.   Approval constitutes a determination by the official, board,
commission or City Council responsible for such determination that the
application is in compliance with the minimum provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance.
         b.   Such approval does not constitute approval of the engineering or
surveying contained in the plans, as the design engineer or surveyor that
sealed the plans is responsible for the adequacy of such plans.
      ART GALLERY or MUSEUM. An institution for the collection, display, or
distribution of objects of art that is open to the general public, and may be
sponsored by a public or quasi-public agency or a private agency.
      ARTERIAL.
         a.   A street designated within the Master Thoroughfare Plan.
         b.   A principal traffic way more or less continuous across the city
or areas adjacent thereto, intended primarily to provide for the movement of
through traffic, and that shall act as a principal connecting street with
highways as indicated in the Master Thoroughfare Plan.
      ARTISAN'S WORKSHOP. An establishment used for the preparation, display,
and sale of individually crafted artwork, jewelry, furniture, sculpture,
pottery, leathercraft, hand-woven articles, and related items.
      ASSISTED LIVING. A residential facility that restricts occupancy to
residents 55 and older and that may provide additional accommodations such as
transportation, meals, facilities for on-site medical care or examination, and
hospice care.
      AUCTION HOUSE. A facility that receives and stores any item(s),
including, but not limited to, motorized vehicles and heavy equipment, for
auction.
      AUTOMOBILE BODY SHOP. A facility that provides collision repair services,
including body frame straightening, replacement of damaged parts, and paint
repair or repainting but not including repair of mechanical components.
      AUTOMOBILE OR OTHER MOTORIZED VEHICLE SALES AND SERVICE. A business
providing sales, display, and service of new and used motorized vehicles,
including automobiles and light trucks under 16,000 pounds gross vehicle weight
rating (GVWR), motorcycles, RVs, and boats, not including semi-truck or heavy
truck sales.
      AUTOMOBILE PARTS STORE. Stores selling automobile parts, tires, and
accessories.
      AUTOMOBILE RENTAL. A business that rents automobiles and light trucks
under 16,000 pounds gross vehicle weight for personal use at a daily rate.
      AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE. A facility that derives some or all of its income
from storage of inoperable or salvaged vehicles for the purpose of resale
(including heavy load vehicles). A salvaged vehicle includes vehicles that have
been declared a total loss due to damage or mechanical deficiencies, qualify as
"non-repairable" as that term is defined by the Texas Department of Motor
Vehicles, are partially or totally dismantled, or vehicles that otherwise
derive the majority of their value from the scrap value of their materials or
parts. An AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE operation may include the retail sales of salvaged
parts and complete or disassembled vehicles or chassis, such as a "pick n'
pull".
      AUTOMOBILE SERVICE GARAGE (MAJOR). A facility for repairs involving
removal, disassembly, and rebuilding of major engine and drivetrain components
including engine, transmission, differential, drive axle, or other lubricated
components, electrical, or hybrid or electric vehicle battery components, with
all work being conducted inside a building and often spanning multiple days.
      AUTOMOBILE SERVICE GARAGE (MINOR). A facility for routine automobile
services or minor repairs, such as tire services, oil changes, brake repair,
battery sales, suspension components, and other peripheral part replacement
that does not involve removal or disassembly of the drivetrain, with all work
being conducted inside the building and generally within a 24 hour period.
      AUTOMOBILE WRECKER AND IMPOUND LOT. A business that employs a tow truck
or flat-bed truck to recover vehicles for temporary storage or impound for a
period not to exceed 90 days.
      AVERAGE GRADE. The average elevation measured at the mid-point of all
building walls where they intersect the ground.
      BAIL BOND SERVICES. A bail bond service or bondsman is any person or
corporation that will act as a surety and pledge money or property as bail for
the appearance of a criminal defendant in court.
      BAKERY (RETAIL). A place for preparing, cooking, baking, and selling of
baked goods, such as pastry items and donuts on the premises.
      BANK or FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. An establishment, open to the public, for
the deposit, custody, loan, exchange or issue of money, the extension of credit
or facilitating the transmission of funds and that is licensed by the
appropriate state or federal agency as a bank, savings and loan association, or
credit union. This includes business activities listed under SIC (Standard
Industrial Classification) Codes 60 and 61, but excludes pawnshops, check
cashing businesses, payday advance/loan businesses, money transfer businesses
and car title loan businesses (see ALTERNATIVE FINANCIAL ESTABLISHMENT).
      BANQUET HALL. A building, facility, room, or portion thereof, which is
rented, leased or otherwise made available to any person or group for a private
event function, that is not open to the general public, and to which admission
is not offered to the general public, whether or not a fee is charged.
      BED AND BREAKFAST INN. An owner (or operator) occupied residence with up
to five bedrooms available for overnight guests. A BED AND BREAKFAST INN may
provide for guest stays up to 14 consecutive days; however, it shall not offer
weekly rental rates. Kitchen and dining facilities may be included to provide
meals for guests only; however, no food preparation shall be permitted in guest
bedrooms. A BED AND BREAKFAST INN shall not include restaurants, banquet
facilities or similar services.
      BLOCK. A tract or parcel of land bounded by streets, or by a combination
of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-way, highway,
stream, or corporate boundary lines.
      BOARD. See BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
      BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling unit where sleeping units are let, with or
without meals, and the dwelling unit is not occupied as a single-family
dwelling. Occupants do not have exclusive access to kitchen and/or bathroom
facilities and have limited or no access to non-common areas of the dwelling
unit. Each occupant has a separate agreement with the owner and may be evicted
individually without affecting the other occupants.
      BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The City's Board of Adjustment.
      BOOK STORE. A retail establishment that, as its primary business, engages
in the sale, rental, or other charge-for-use of books, magazines, newspapers,
greeting cards, postcards, videotapes, computer software, or any other printed
or electronically conveyed information or media.
      BOWLING ALLEY. An establishment that devotes more than 50% of its gross
floor area to bowling lanes, equipment, and playing area. A BOWLING ALLEY is
wholly enclosed in a building that is treated acoustically so that noise
generated by the enterprise is not perceptible at the bounding property line.
      BREWERY or DISTILLERY. An industrial use that brews ales, beers, meads,
or similar beverages on site. BREWERIES and DISTILLERIES are classified as a
micro and macro based on barrels brewed annually.
         a.   MICROBREWERY or MICRODISTILLERY. Any facility that brews fewer
than 10,000 barrels annually and may include a tasting room, brewpub, and
retail sale for off-premises consumption.
         b.   MACROBREWERY or MACRODISTILLERY. Any facility that brews 10,000
barrels or more annually and may include a tasting room.
      BREWPUB. A restaurant in which the owner or operator, pursuant to a
brewpub license granted by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission (TABC), (i)
manufactures, brews, bottles, cans, packages, and labels malt liquor, ale, and
beer; and (ii) sells or offers without charge, on the premises of the
restaurant, to ultimate consumers for consumption on or off those premises,
malt liquor, ale, or beer produced by the owner or operator, in or from a
lawful container, to the extent the sales or offers are allowed under the owner
or operator's other TABC permits or licenses.
      BUILDING. Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, personal property, records or other movable property and when
separated in a manner sufficient to prevent fire, each portion of such building
shall be deemed a separate building.
      BUILDING FAÇADE.
         a.   PRIMARY FAÇADE. A façade that faces a public or private street or
street right-of-way, park, courtyard, or trail.
         b.   SECONDARY FAÇADE. A façade that does not face a public or private
street or street right-of-way, park, courtyard, or trail.
         c.   FRONT FAÇADE. The façade that contains a primary public entrance
to a building.
      BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from grade to the
midpoint between the highest roof peak and the eave.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7872.png]
 
      BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Official of the city or their designee.
      BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the city before a building or
structure is started, improved, enlarged or altered as proof that such action
is in compliance with the city code.
      BUILDING SETBACK LINE. The line within a property defining the minimum
horizontal distance between a building or other structure and the adjacent
street right-of-way/property line.
      BUSINESS. Retail, commercial and manufacturing uses and districts as
defined in the Zoning Ordinance.
      CAR WASH, FULL SERVICE. A facility where a customer can have a
motorcycle, automobile, and light load vehicle washed in exchange for financial
consideration.
      CAR WASH, SELF SERVICE. A facility, typically coin operated, used by the
customer to wash motorcycles, automobiles and light load vehicles.
      CARPENTRY SHOP. A shop involving woodworking and the assembly of wood
products.
      CARPORT. A roofed structure used for vehicle storage that is not
permanently enclosed on at least three sides and which is constructed over a
parking space accessible by a driveway to a public street or alley.
      CATERING SERVICE. A service providing meals or refreshments for public or
private entertainment for a fee.
      CEMENT STORAGE. A facility for unpackaged storage of raw cement, a
binding substance used in concrete, mortar, and other construction
applications.
      CEMETERY or MAUSOLEUM. Property used for the interring of the dead.
      CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. Written authorization issued by the Building
Official to conduct a use listed in subsection 3.03 Use Chart at a particular
location.
      CERAMIC AND POTTERY MANUFACTURER. Manufacturing site for ceramic and
pottery goods, including dust, odor, and fume control.
      CHILD CARE FACILITY (CHILDREN'S HOME). A business for the care of
children at a location other than a caretaker's residence for more than 24
hours. See Chapter 42 of the Tex. Human Resources Code, Regulation of Certain
Facilities, Homes, and Agencies that Provide Child Care Services.
      CHILD CARE FACILITY (DAY-CARE CENTER). A business for the care of
children at a location other than a caretaker's residence for less than 24
hours a day, for seven or more children under 14 years of age for less than 24
hours a day, but at least two hours a day, three or more days a week. See
Chapter 42 of the Tex. Human Resources Code, Regulation of Certain Facilities,
Homes, and Agencies that Provide Child Care Services.
      CHILD CARE HOME (SEVEN OR MORE CHILDREN). A child-care facility that
provides care in the caretaker's own residence for seven or more children,
excluding children who are related to the caretaker, for less than 24 hours a
day, but at least two hours a day, three or more days a week. See Chapter 42 of
the Tex. Human Resources Code.
      CHILD CARE HOME (UP TO SIX CHILDREN). A child-care facility that provides
care in the caretaker's own residence for not more than six children under 14
years of age, excluding children who are related to the caretaker, and that
provides care after school hours for not more than six additional elementary
school children, with the total number of children not to exceed 12. Also known
as a "Family Home". When the home operates as part of a network of homes, may
be referred to as a "Cottage Family Home"(See Chapter 42 of the Tex. Human
Resources Code).
      CITY. The City of Cleburne, Texas, together with all its governing and
operating bodies.
      CITY ATTORNEY. The City Attorney of the city.
      CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the city.
      CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the city or their designee.
      CITY SECRETARY. The person(s) so designated by the city to provide
clerical and official services for the City Council. This term shall also
include any designee of the CITY SECRETARY.
      CIVIC/CONVENTION CENTER. A building or complex of buildings used for
cultural, recreational, athletic, convention, or entertainment purposes and
rentable by large groups such as professional organizations, orchestras, plays,
stage productions, debates, and recitals.
      CODE OF ORDINANCES. The Cleburne Code of Ordinances, as amended.
      COLLECTOR. A street that is continuous through several residential
districts and is intended as a connecting street between residential districts
and nonresidential districts, highways, or business districts, and that may
serve both through-traffic and local access functions.
      COMMISSION. See PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
      COMMON ACCESS EASEMENT. See EASEMENT, COMMON ACCESS.
      COMMUNITY CENTER, PRIVATE or CLUBHOUSE. A building or facility designed
for the recreational use or other common use by a neighborhood or community
other than the general public, and that is typically owned, operated, or
maintained by an entity such as a homeowners' or property owners' association,
neighborhood organization, or management company.
      COMMUNITY HOME I. A licensed residential facility that provides food and
shelter, personal guidance, care, habilitation services, and supervision for no
more than six persons with a disability as defined by Chapter 123 of the Tex.
Human Resources Code, the Americans with Disabilities Act or the Fair Housing
Act.
      COMMUNITY HOME II. A licensed residential facility that provides food and
shelter, personal guidance, care, habilitation services, and supervision for
seven or more persons with a disability as defined by Chapter 123 of the Tex.
Human Resources Code, the Americans with Disabilities Act or the Fair Housing
Act.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The plan adopted by City Council under the authority
of Tex. Local Gov’t Code Chapter 213 for the purpose of promoting sound
development and the public health, safety, and welfare and that is used to
coordinate and guide the establishment of development regulations, including
this Zoning Ordinance.
      CONCEPT PLAN. A generalized plan that depicts how future development may
occur on a property. An approved concept plan forms the basis for reviewing
future submittals of plans, plats, and permits, along with the requirements of
the zoning code and other city codes. Concept plans contain information
regarding planned or proposed uses, buildings, streets, utilities, and open
space, but do not contain final design or engineering of improvements that are
necessary for final review and approval of a project or permit.
      CONCRETE OR ASPHALT BATCHING PLANT, PERMANENT. A permanent manufacturing
facility for the production of concrete or asphalt.
      CONCRETE OR ASPHALT BATCHING PLANT, TEMPORARY. A temporary manufacturing
facility for the on-site production of concrete or asphalt during construction
of a project, and to be removed when the project is completed.
      CONSIGNMENT STORE. A store that receives merchandise on consignment from
individuals and places for resale.
      CONTRACTOR'S SHOP or STORAGE YARD. A building, part of a building, or
land area for the construction or outdoor or indoor storage of materials,
tools, products, and vehicle fleets.
      CONVENIENCE STORE. A business that is primarily engaged in the retail
sale of convenience goods, or both convenience goods and gasoline, that has
less than 20,000 gross square feet of floor area. For purposes of this
definition, “convenience” goods mean food, beverage, household, personal care
and pharmaceutical items. A gasoline pump is not considered a drive-in or
drive-through service.
      COUNCIL. See CITY COUNCIL.
      COUNTRY CLUB. An area containing a golf course and club house that may
include as adjunct facilities a dining room, private club, swimming pool,
cabanas, tennis courts and similar service and recreational facilities for the
members.
      COUNTY. Johnson County, Texas and any of its agencies or officers, unless
otherwise specified.
      DANCE, MUSIC, OR DRAMA STUDIO. Studio for performing arts education or
similar activities.
      DATA CENTER. (Excluding Cryptocurrency mining). A facility designed for
the centralized storage, management, processing, and dissemination of digital
data. These facilities house computing, networking, and telecommunications
infrastructure that support cloud services, enterprise IT operations, and high-
performance computing applications. The infrastructure must be fully enclosed
within a permanent commercial or industrial building constructed in compliance
with all applicable building codes and zoning regulations. The structure must
be built on a permanent foundation and include standard commercial features
such as HVAC, fire suppression systems, and other required safety and
operational components. Temporary structures, including modular units, shipping
containers, prefabricated enclosures, or any similar non-permanent facilities,
are not permitted.
      DEVELOPER.
         a.   A person or entity, limited to the property owner or duly
authorized representative thereof, who proposes to undertake or undertakes the
division, development, or improvement of land and other activities covered by
this Zoning Ordinance.
         b.   The word DEVELOPER is intended to include the terms subdivider,
property owner, and, when submitting platting documents, applicant.
      DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, paving, drainage,
utilities, storage, and agricultural activities.
      DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR. The person designated by the City Manager to
provide oversight for and have responsibility of the city's planning and
development related duties. This term shall also include any designee of the
Development Director. Also, this term shall be inclusive of any future
variations of the term (see Zoning Administrator).
      DONATION OR RECYCLING COLLECTION POINT. An incidental use that serves as
a neighborhood drop-off point for and temporary storage of donations and
recoverable resources. No processing of such items occurs on-site and the site
functions solely as an area of collecting materials. This facility is generally
located in a shopping center parking lot or in a public/quasi-public area such
as in a church and school.
      DRIVE-THRU OR DRIVE-IN USES. A commercial use that allows patrons to
purchase and receive goods or services without leaving a vehicle by utilizing
one or more drive-through lanes, drive-in spaces, order boards, or pick-up
windows. Does not include a restaurant, car wash, full service or parking
spaces reserved for take-out, carside, or curbside service where goods or
services are purchased within a building or prior to entering the site.
      DUPLEX. See DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY (ATTACHED - DUPLEX).
      DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
      DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. Any building, or portion thereof, that is
designed, built, rented, leased or let to be occupied as three or more dwelling
units or apartments.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY (ATTACHED - DUPLEX). A building designed for
occupancy for two families living independently of each other. A two-family
attached unit (also known as a duplex) consists of two units on a single lot or
has a lot line dividing the building and separating the building's two
dwellings units onto two separate lots.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY (ATTACHED - TOWNHOUSE). A dwelling that is joined
to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or abutting separate
wall, and that is designed for occupancy by one family and is located on a
separate lot delineated by front, side and rear lot lines.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY (DETACHED). A dwelling designed and constructed
for occupancy by one family and located on a lot or separate building tract and
having no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract
and occupied by one family.
      EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner of the use of land by the public, a
corporation, entity, or persons for specific purposes.
      EASEMENT, COMMON ACCESS. An easement created for the purpose of providing
vehicular or pedestrian access to a property.
      EFFECTIVE DATE. The date this Zoning Ordinance, or a subsequent amendment
thereto, shall become effective.
      ELECTRICAL ENERGY GENERATING PLANT. A facility or structure where
electrical (high voltage) energy is generated.
      ELECTRICAL POWER SUBSTATIONS. A part of the electrical distribution
system with the primary function to transform electrical voltage, and includes
transformer stations and switching stations.
      ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION. Distribution components of the electrical system
including, but not limited to, lines, wires, conduit, transformers, and support
poles.
      ENCLOSED BUILDING. A building that must be enclosed on four or more
sides, with customary openings for windows and doors.
      ENGINEER. Per Tex. Occupations Code § 1001.002, as may be amended, a
person licensed to engage in the practice of engineering in the State of Texas.
      EQUESTRIAN CENTER. An improved area, lighted and generally fenced, of at
least 30 feet in width or length within which equestrian activities involving
horse riding or driving occurs. Also includes boarding stables.
      EQUIPMENT RENTAL (HEAVY). An establishment that rents large equipment and
machinery such as compressors, backhoes, front-end loaders, roller compactors,
generators, tree coppers, trailers, bulldozers, trenching machines, sky lifts,
tractors, and dump trucks. The equipment is generally stored outside. This use
may involve the starting and running of machinery.
      EQUIPMENT REPAIR SHOP. Business providing basic repair services for
mechanical equipment.
      ESTABLISHED BUILD LINE. Where a building line has been established along
the same side of the street within an existing block and the building line
creates a front yard setback lesser in depth than that required by the zoning
district (applies in the SF-7, Single-Family Dwelling District).
      ETJ. See EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.
      EXTERMINATOR. A business providing services for the extermination of
rodents and insects.
      EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION. The unincorporated area, not a part of any
other municipality, that is contiguous to the corporate limits of the city, the
outer limits of which are measured from the extremities of the corporate limits
of the city outward up to the distance stipulated in Tex. Local Gov’t Code
Chapter 42, as may be amended, according to the population of the city, and in
which area the city may apply its subdivision regulations and other ordinances
and regulations specifically provided by state law to be applied within the
EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.
      FABRICATION, METAL OR PLASTIC. The creation of parts, components, molds,
or other objects for use or display from metal or plastic base materials.
      FAMILY. A person living alone, or one of the following groups of people
living as a single housekeeping unit and sharing common living, sleeping,
cooking, and eating facilities:
         a.   Any number of people related by blood, marriage, adoption,
guardianship, or other duly authorized custodial relationship;
         b.   Up to four unrelated people; or
         c.   Up to two unrelated people and any children (including adopted
children) related to either of them.
      FARMER'S MARKET. An occasional or periodic market held in an open area or
in a structure where groups of individual sellers offer for sale to the public
such items as fresh produce, seasonal fruits, fresh flowers, arts and crafts
items, and food and beverages (but not to include second-hand goods) dispensed
from booths located on-site.
      FEE SCHEDULE. A separate document listing fees for various city
applications, prepared by the City Manager or designee and approved by City
Council and which may be amended periodically.
      FEED STORE. An establishment engaged in retail sale of supplies directly
related to the day-to-day activities of agricultural production.
      FLEA MARKET. A retail market, customarily outdoors, with booths from
which vendors generally sell secondhand goods.
      FLOODPLAIN. An area of land subject to inundation by a 100-year frequency
flood as determined using standard engineering practices and generally as shown
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) of the city.
      FLOOR AREA.
         a.   GROSS FLOOR AREA. The floor area within the inside perimeter of
the exterior walls of a building exclusive of vent shafts and courts, but
including corridors, stairways, closets, the thickness of interior walls,
columns, or other features. The floor area of a building, or portion thereof,
not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the usable area under the
horizontal projection of the roof or floor above.
         b.   NET FLOOR AREA. The floor area within the inside perimeter of the
exterior walls of a building exclusive of all non-habitable space such as
garages, stairways, closets, and utility rooms.
      FLORIST. Retail business whose principal activity is the selling of
plants that are not grown on the site and whose business is conducted within an
enclosed building.
      FOOD PROCESSING PLANT. A building or plant that uses special processes,
treatments or blending of foods to achieve a specified result. Not a
distribution center.
      FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. A facility or building, other than an office,
professional, medical, or business used by a private organization and limited
to use by its members and that may include one or more accessory uses such as
alcoholic beverage sales and service (on-site consumption) or special event
center.
      FREEWAY. State Highway 121/Chisholm Trail Parkway and U.S. 67, including
frontage roads.
      FRONT YARD. See YARD, FRONT.
      FRONTAGE. All the property abutting on one side of the street, or between
two intersecting streets, measured along the street line.
      FUNERAL HOME or MORTUARY. Establishment engaged in undertaking services
such as preparing the dead for burial, and arranging and managing funerals.
      FURNITURE REPAIR AND UPHOLSTERING SHOP. A business that repairs and
replaces upholstery to household and office furnishings; does not include motor
vehicle upholstering or repair.
      GASOLINE OR DIESEL PASSENGER VEHICLE FILLING OR SERVICE STATION. Property
used partly or entirely for storing or dispensing flammable liquids,
combustible liquids, liquefied flammable gas, or flammable gas into the fuel
tanks of passenger motor vehicles, including any associated use.
      GASOLINE OR DIESEL PASSENGER VEHICLE SELF-SERVICE PUMPS ONLY. Property
used partly or entirely for storing or dispensing flammable liquids,
combustible liquids, liquefied flammable gas, or flammable gas into the fuel
tanks of passenger motor vehicles. This use addresses the presence of self-
service pumps only and does not include any related buildings, such as an
associated convenience store or service station.
      GASOLINE OR DIESEL TRUCK FILLING OR SERVICE STATION. Property used partly
or entirely for storing or dispensing flammable liquids, combustible liquids,
liquefied flammable gas, or flammable gas into the fuel tanks of commercial
motor vehicles, such as semi-trailer truck, including any associated
convenience store or service station.
      GASOLINE OR DIESEL TRUCK FILLING OR SERVICE STATION WITH OVERNIGHT
PARKING. A gasoline or diesel truck filling or service station with
accommodation for sleeping, showering, dining, and overnight parking.
      GOLF COURSE. A private or public tract of land laid out with at least
nine holes for playing a game of golf or a derivation of golf such as frisbee
golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards. A GOLF COURSE may
include a clubhouse and shelters as accessory uses.
      GREENHOUSE (COMMERCIAL NON-HOBBY). A building or enclosed facility used
or designed to grow plants for commercial use.
      GROCERY STORE (LESS THAN 20,000 SQUARE FEET). See CONVENIENCE STORE.
      GROCERY STORE (EQUAL TO OR GREATER THAN 20,000 SQUARE FEET). A retail
establishment that sells fresh meat, produce, dairy, and bread as well as
prepackaged foods and other household goods and may include other ancillary
uses such as restaurant or cafeteria, without drive-thru, pharmacy, and medical
clinic.
      GUEST HOUSE/IN-LAW QUARTERS. Living quarters operated as an incidental/
accessory use that is either attached or detached from the principal residence
and used without renting or leasing as a residence by either guests or persons
employed to provide domestic services to the occupants of the principal
residence.
      GUN CLUB, SKEET OR TARGET RANGE (INDOOR). The use of a structure for
archery or the discharging of firearms indoors for the purpose of target
practice or competition.
      GUN CLUB, SKEET OR TARGET RANGE (OUTDOOR). The use of land for archery or
the discharging of firearms outdoors for the purpose of target practice or
competition.
      GYM or HEALTH/FITNESS CENTER. A facility where individuals use equipment
or facilities for the purpose of physical exercise.
      GYMNASTIC STUDIO. A building or portion of a building used as a place of
work for a gymnast or for instructional classes in gymnastics.
      HALFWAY HOUSE. A facility for the housing, rehabilitation and training of
persons on probation, parole or early release from correctional institutions,
or other persons found guilty of criminal offense as regulated by Tex. Gov’t
Code Chapter 508.
      HANDICRAFT SHOP. A shop where handcrafted art objects are made and
displayed for sale.
      HAZARDOUS WASTE DISPOSAL. A facility for the disposal of hazardous
materials (see subsection 3.06).
      HEAVY LOAD VEHICLE. A self-propelled vehicle having a manufacturer's
recommended gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) equal to or greater than 16,000
pounds, such as large recreational vehicles exceeding 32 feet, semi-trucks or
tractor-trailers, buses, farm or construction equipment, and other similar
vehicles.
      HEAVY LOAD VEHICLE SALES AND SERVICE. Retail sale and minor service (oil
change, tire change, brake service, and other services similar to those
authorized for automobile service garage (minor)) of heavy load vehicles,
including recreational vehicles, trailers, and industrialized housing
regardless of weight rating from a lot where vehicles are offered for sale in
an operable condition, are parked on an improved surface, and where sales are
conducted from an office in a permanent building.
      HEAVY LOAD VEHICLE SERVICE GARAGE. A facility for repair of heavy load
vehicles involving functions included under automobile service garage (minor)
and also involving the removal, disassembly, and rebuilding of major engine and
drivetrain components including engine, transmission, differential, drive axle,
or other lubricated components, electrical, or hybrid or electric vehicle
battery components, with all work being conducted inside a building and often
spanning multiple days.
      HEIGHT (BUILDING). See BUILDING HEIGHT.
      HELIPORT or HELISTOP. An area designed to be used for the landing or
takeoff of helicopters including operations facilities, such as maintenance,
loading and unloading, storage, fueling, or terminal facilities.
      HOBBY SHOP. A retail shop that sells materials and supplies to persons
for the making of arts and crafts, including models.
      HOME-BASED BUSINESS. A business, occupation, or profession conducted
within a residential dwelling unit by one or more permanent occupants of the
dwelling.
      HOMEOWNERS' OR PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION. A formal non- profit
organization operating under recorded land agreements through which:
         a.   Each lot or property owner in a specific area is automatically a
member;
         b.   Each lot or property interest is automatically subject to a
charge for a proportionate share of the expense for the organization's
activities, such as the maintenance of common property; and
         c.   The charge if unpaid, becomes a lien against the nonpaying
member's property.
      HOSPITAL, ACUTE CARE. An institution where sick or injured patients are
given medical or surgical treatment on an out-patient basis, and that is
licensed by the State of Texas.
      HOSPITAL, CHRONIC CARE. An institution where persons suffering from
serious illness or injury are given care and treatment on an in-patient or
prolonged basis, and that is licensed by the State of Texas.
      HOTEL. A building or group of buildings used as a temporary dwelling
place for individuals in exchange for financial consideration where customary
hotel services such as linen, housekeeping service, and telephone are provided.
Hotel room units are assessed through doorways into an internal hallway,
courtyard or lobby. Financial consideration for hotel room units is generally
calculated on a nightly basis.
      HOTEL, EXTENDED STAY. A building or group of buildings used as a
temporary dwelling place for individuals in exchange for financial
consideration where customary hotel services such as linen, housekeeping
service, and telephone are provided. Residence hotel room units are designed to
be suitable for long-term occupancy with financial consideration being
calculated on a nightly, weekly, or monthly basis. A HOTEL, EXTENDED STAY is
not considered a dwelling unit or residential use.
      IMPROVED SURFACE. Concrete or asphalt surface meeting the city's standard
detail requirements or as specified in this Zoning Ordinance.
      IMPROVEMENT. Any man-made fixed item that becomes part of or placed upon
real property. See also PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT.
      INDUSTRIALIZED (COMMERCIAL) BUILDING. Per Tex. Occupations Code §
1202.003, as may be amended:
         a.   A commercial structure that is:
            i.   Constructed in one or more modules or constructed using one or
more modular components built at a location other than the commercial site; and
            ii.   Designed to be used as a commercial building when the module
or the modular component is transported to the commercial site and erected or
installed.
         b.   An INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING includes the structure's plumbing,
heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems.
            i.   An INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING includes a permanent commercial
structure and a commercial structure designed to be transported from one
commercial site to another commercial site but does not include commercial
building or structure that is:
               1.   Installed in a manner other than on a permanent foundation;
and
               2.   Either:
                  a.   Not open to the public; or
                  b.   Less than 1,500 square feet in total area and used other
than as a school or a place of religious worship.
      INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING. Per Tex. Occupations Code § 1202.002, as may be
amended:
         a.   A residential structure that is:
            i.   Designed for the occupancy of one or more families;
            ii.   Constructed in one or more modules or constructed using one
or more modular components built at a location other than the permanent site;
and
            iii.   Designed to be used as a permanent residential structure
when the module or the modular component is transported to the permanent site
and erected or installed on a permanent foundation system.
         b.   INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING includes the structure's plumbing,
heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems.
         c.   INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING does not include:
            i.   Housing constructed of a sectional or panelized system that
does not use a modular component; or
            ii.   A ready-built home constructed in a manner in which the
entire living area is contained in a single unit or section at a temporary
location for the purpose of selling and moving the home to another location.
         d.   See subsection 3.04.B.16) for industrialized housing regulations.
         e.   For mobile homes and manufactured homes, see MANUFACTURED
HOUSING.
      INFRASTRUCTURE. All streets, alleys, sidewalks, storm drainage, water,
and wastewater facilities, utilities, lighting, transportation, and other
facilities as required by the city.
      INSTITUTION FOR THE CARE OF ALCOHOLIC, PSYCHIATRIC OR NARCOTIC PATIENTS.
An institution offering resident treatment to alcoholic, psychiatric or
narcotic patients.
      JEWELRY MANUFACTURING OR ASSEMBLY. A facility for manufacturing or
assembling jewelry.
      LANDFILL. A tract of land used for the burial of farm, residential,
institutional, industrial, or commercial waste that is not hazardous, medical,
or radioactive.
      LAUNDRY, COMMERCIAL. An industrial facility where fabrics are cleaned
with substantially non-aqueous organic solvents on a commercial or wholesale
basis.
      LAUNDRY, DRY CLEANING DROP-OFF/PICK-UP. A launderer that cleans fabrics,
clothes, and linens with facilities for on-site drop-off and pick-up by the
patron.
      LAUNDRY, SELF-SERVICE. A laundromat facility where patrons wash, dry, or
dry clean clothing or other fabrics in machines operated by the patron.
      LEATHER PRODUCT AND SADDLE MANUFACTURING. A facility that uses animal
hides to produce products for sale, including saddles.
      LIBRARY. A room or building for exhibiting, or an institution in charge
of, a collection of books, or artistic, historical, or scientific objects.
      LIGHT ASSEMBLY AND MANUFACTURING PROCESSES.
         a.   The fabrication, assembly, manufacturing, and packaging of
finished products or parts, predominantly from previously prepared materials.
         b.   Light fabrication, assembly, manufacturing, and packaging
processes are those that do not emit detectable dust, odor, smoke, gas or fumes
beyond the property lines of the lot or tract upon which the use is located and
that do not generate noise or vibration at the property boundary that is
generally perceptible in frequency or pressure above the ambient level of noise
in the adjacent areas.
      LIGHT LOAD VEHICLE. A self-propelled vehicle having a manufacturer's
recommended gross vehicle weight (GVW) not greater than 16,000 pounds, and
having no more than two axles, such as pick-up trucks, vans, recreational
vehicles (less than 32 feet in length), campers and other similar vehicles but
not including automobiles and motorcycles.
      LIVE WORK UNIT. A dwelling unit such as an apartment in which a
significant portion of the space includes a nonresidential use that is operated
by the tenant where all uses, including the live work unit itself and the
associated nonresidential use are permissible under subsection 3.03.
      LOCAL STREET. A street used primarily for access to the abutting
properties.
      LOT. Land occupied, or to be occupied, by a building and its accessory
buildings and including such open spaces as are required under this chapter and
having its principal frontage on a public street or officially approved place.
      LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance from the front property line or
right-of-way to the rear property line or the line that is most nearly parallel
to the front property line.
      LOT LINES. Means the lines bounding a lot.
      LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which
has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk, or a parcel of land, the
deed for which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk prior to
adoption of the Zoning Ordinance.
      LOT WIDTH. The mean horizontal distance between side lines measured at
right angles to the depth.
      MANUFACTURED HOUSING. Prefabricated housing products that are typically
manufactured or assembled at a location other than the end user's permanent
site, and that are regulated by the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act
(Tex. Occupations Code Chapter 1201) and Tex. Occupations Code Chapter 1202,
Industrialized Housing and Buildings. For the purpose of this ordinance, the
following constitute the types of manufactured homes:
         a.   MOBILE HOME.
            i.   Any manufactured home that was constructed prior to June 15,
1976.
            ii.   As governed by the definition within the Texas Manufactured
Housing Standards Act (Tex. Occupations Code § 1201.003), a movable dwelling
designed to be transported on its own chassis on the highway (either intact or
in major sections) by a prime mover, that is constructed with a base section so
as to be independently self-supporting, and that does not require a permanent
foundation for year-round living.
         b.   MANUFACTURED HOME.
            i.   Manufactured homes are regulated by HUD Code. A HUD-Code
manufactured home is also defined as a movable manufactured home that was
constructed after June 15, 1976. A HUD-Code manufactured home will display a
red certification label on the exterior of each transportable section.
            ii.   As governed by the definition within the Texas Manufactured
Housing Standards Act (Tex. Occupations Code § 1201.003), a movable dwelling
designed to be transported on the highway, either intact or in major sections,
by a prime mover, that can be used as a residential dwelling either with or
without a permanent foundation.
      MANUFACTURING OR INDUSTRIAL OPERATIONS. An establishment engaged in
manufacturing, assembly, packaging, or other similar process where products are
manipulated from raw materials or base components into a finished commodity for
wholesale or retail sale. This definition also includes the bulk storage and
handling of products and materials associated with the manufacturing or
industrial process, or a manufacturing or industrial use having the potential
to produce noise, dust, glare, odors, or vibration that will affect neighboring
properties if not property attenuated.
      MASTER THOROUGHFARE PLAN. The plan that guides the development of
adequate roadway circulation and traffic management within the city, and
includes the official map designating the ultimate cross sections of streets as
local street, collector street, arterial street, or freeway.
      MEAT PROCESSING PLANT. A building where live animals are killed and sold
after packing and processing.
      MEDICAL CLINIC. A group of offices for one or more physicians, surgeons,
chiropractors, or dentists engaged in treating the sick or injured, but not
including rooms for the chronic care of patients.
      MOBILE HOME PARKS, TRAILER PARKS, TRAILER COURTS, or TRAILER
SUBDIVISIONS. An area designated, arranged, or used for the location of mobile
homes that are intended for occupancy as living quarters by individuals or
families. RV parks are not included in this definition.
      MODULAR HOME. See INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING.
      MOTEL. A building or group of buildings in which lodging is provided to
transient guests, offered to the public for compensation, and in which access
to and from each room or unit is through an exterior door allowing for direct
access from a vehicle to the room or unit door.
      MOVIE THEATRE. A specialized theater for showing movies or motion
pictures.
      MOVIE THEATRE, DRIVE IN. An establishment that allows patrons to watch
movies on-site from their vehicles and where the movies are projected onto a
physical screen or surface while audio is broadcast via a designated radio
frequency or other means not involving sound that is amplified or otherwise
capable of being heard beyond the property line of the theater.
      MULTI-FAMILY. See DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.
      NEWSPAPER PRINTING. A commercial printing operation involving a process
that is considered printing, imprinting, reproducing, or duplicating images and
using printing methods including but not limited to offset printing,
lithography, web offset, flexographic, and screen process printing.
      NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot that does not meet the current requirements of
this Zoning Ordinance, but that was in conformance with the standards in place
at the time of its inception (see subsection 3.07).
      NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure that does not meet the current
requirements of this Zoning Ordinance, but that was in conformance with the
standards in place at the time of its inception (see subsection 3.07).
      NONCONFORMING USE. A use of land that does not meet the current
requirements of this Zoning Ordinance, but that was in conformance with the
standards in place at the time of its inception (see subsection 3.07).
      NONCONFORMITIES. A general term used to refer to nonconforming uses,
nonconforming structures, and nonconforming lots (see subsection 3.07).
      NON-PROFIT SERVICES. A facility operated by a non-profit organization
concerned with charity and provision of help or relief to people through the
collection and distribution of contributed items and funds. Customary uses
include storage of supplies prior to distribution, offices, and short-term
over-night accommodations for displaced individuals.
      NONRESIDENTIAL USE. A use other than a residential use, including
residential and nonresidential uses in the same building (mixed-use).
      NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS. The NC, LC, RC, MU, CI, and I Zoning
Districts. See Table 2: Zoning Districts.
      NURSERY, NON-RETAIL. An establishment for the cultivation and
propagation, display, storage, and sale (retail and wholesale) of large plants,
shrubs, trees and other materials used in indoor or outdoor plantings, and the
contracting for installation or maintenance of landscape material as an
accessory use. Outdoor display and storage is presumed with this use.
      NURSERY, RETAIL. A retail business for the display and sale of trees,
shrubs, flowers, ornamental plants, seeds, garden and lawn supplies, and other
materials used in indoor and outdoor planting, without outside storage or
display.
      OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL, MEDICAL, OR BUSINESS. A room or group of rooms used
for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service industry, or
government.
      ON-PREMISE RESIDENCE. A residence located on a nonresidential premises
and occupied only by an employee of the business that occupies the
nonresidential premises.
      OPEN SPACE. Area included in any side, rear or front yard, or any
unoccupied space on the lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky, except
for the ordinary projection of architectural features such as cornices, eaves,
or bay windows.
      OUTSIDE DISPLAY. The temporary outside display of finished goods.
Finished goods are specifically intended for immediate retail sales and are not
intended nor used as an area for the continuous keeping or storage (i.e.,
outside storage) of such finished goods. Examples of OUTSIDE DISPLAY include
the display of grills, deer feeders, patio furniture, lawn mowers, flowers,
pumpkins, Christmas trees, and clothing. For information regarding OUTSIDE
DISPLAY regulations, see the Use Chart and subsection 3.04.B.18.
      OUTSIDE SALES. The sale of goods or commodities from an open yard where
no sales activity is conducted from a permanent building.
      OUTSIDE STORAGE. The continuous keeping or storage of any finished or
unfinished goods, materials, merchandise, or equipment outside of a building
for more than 24 hours.
      PARK, PLAYGROUND, OR COMMUNITY CENTER, PUBLIC. An open recreational
facility or park owned and operated by a public agency such as the city or the
school district, and available to the general public.
      PARKING (PRINCIPAL USE). An open area or place, other than a street or
alley, used for temporary parking of vehicles with no other principal use or
principal building on the same lot.
      PARKING (HEAVY LOAD VEHICLES). An open area or place, other than a street
or alley, used for temporary parking of vehicles 16,000 pounds GVWR or higher.
      PARKING GARAGE. A multilevel structure used for temporary parking or
storage of automobiles which may include other commercial uses on the ground
floor.
      PARKING SPACE. An area of not less than 162 square feet (measuring
approximately nine feet by 18 feet), not on a public street or alley, surfaced
with an all-weather surface, enclosed or unenclosed, together with an all-
weather surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley
permitting free ingress and egress. Such term, unless otherwise specified, does
not include in any residential use district the parking of heavy load vehicles
for commercial purposes or head-in parking adjacent to a public thoroughfare
wherein the maneuvering is done on a public street.
      PAWN SHOP. An establishment that lends or advances money or other things
for profit on the pledge and possession of personal property, or other valuable
things, other than securities or written or printed evidences of indebtedness,
or, that deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable things
on condition of selling the same back to the seller at a stipulated price.
      PENAL AND CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTIONS. Publicly or privately operated
facility for the detention, confinement, treatment or rehabilitation of persons
arrested or convicted for the violation of civil or criminal law. Such
facilities include an adult detention center, juvenile delinquency center,
jail, prison, and halfway house.
      PERSONAL SERVICE SHOP. Establishments primarily engaged in providing
services generally involving the care of the person or apparel including but
not limited to barber and beauty shops, nail shops and massage shops,
dressmaking, shoe shining, dry-cleaning and laundry pick-up stations, tailor or
seamstress, and health clubs.
      PET STORE. A retail sales establishment primarily involved in the sale of
pet supplies or the sale or adoption of domestic animals, such as dogs, cats,
fish, birds, and reptiles, excluding exotic animals and farm animals such as
horses, goats, sheep, and poultry.
      PETROLEUM AND GAS STORAGE AND COLLECTION FACILITIES. An outdoor area
where storage of petroleum and natural gas is allowed (tank farm).
      PHARMACY. A shop or a store wherein prescription medicines are processed
and compounded before retail sale to patients and where secondary medical
supplies or sundries may be offered for sale.
      PHOTOGRAPHER'S OR ARTIST'S STUDIO/FILM PROCESSING. Workspace for one or
more photographers, artists, or artisans, including the accessory sale of art
produced on the premises.
      PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the
city.
      PLANNING DIRECTOR. See Development Director and Zoning Administrator.
      PLASTIC PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING. The making of goods by processing
plastics materials or raw rubber, with dust and fume control.
      PLAT. A map or chart of the subdivision, lot or tract of land that is
filed in the county plat records.
      PLAY FIELD or STADIUM (NO NIGHTTIME ILLUMINATION). An athletic field or
stadium including a baseball field, football field, soccer pitch, or stadium
that does not include permanent nighttime illumination.
      PLAY FIELD or STADIUM (WITH NIGHTTIME ILLUMINATION). An athletic field or
stadium including a baseball field, football field, soccer pitch, or stadium
that does include permanent nighttime illumination.
      PLUMBING/ELECTRICAL/AIR CONDITIONING STORE (RETAIL SALES ONLY).
Establishments primarily engaged in retail sales of plumbing, heating, and air-
conditioning equipment, without warehouse facilities, includes storage for
ordinary repair but no materials for contracting work.
      POLICE OR FIRE STATION. Protection centers operated by a governmental
agency, including administrative offices, storage of equipment, temporary
detention facilities, and the open or enclosed parking of safety vehicles;
excluding, however, correctional institutions.
      PRINCIPAL BUILDING. The building that contains the primary function or
activity on a lot.
      PRINCIPAL USE. The primary or predominant use of any lot or building.
      PRINTING/DUPLICATION SHOP or MAILING CENTER.
         a.   An establishment in which the principal business consists of
duplicating and printing services using photocopy, blueprint, or offset
printing equipment, including publishing, binding, and engraving; or
         b.   A commercial business that conducts the retail sale of stationery
products, provides packaging and mail services (both U.S. Postal and private
service), and provides mailboxes for lease.
      PRIVATE CLUB. Establishments that hold and have been issued a private
club registration permit or other private club permits under the Tex. Alcoholic
Beverage Code Chapters 32 and 33, as amended.
      PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. Services such as support services, production of
goods, or repair of items not otherwise listed or defined that are performed by
a business or individual in exchange for money or other consideration and that
are entirely conducted within an enclosed building and where no sound, dust,
odor, or glare is emitted from the building during the operation of the use.
      PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any facility or service together with its associated
public site, right-of-way or easement necessary to provide transportation,
storm drainage, public or private utilities, parks or recreational, energy or
similar essential public services and facilities, for which the city or other
government authority ultimately assumes the responsibility for maintenance,
operation or ownership.
      PUBLIC USE OR BUILDING - MUNICIPAL. Any use or building held, used, or
controlled exclusively for public purposes by the city, without reference to
the ownership of the building or of the realty upon which it is situated.
      RADIO OR TV STATION (NO TOWER). Establishments primarily engaged in the
provision of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished
through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms. Facilities classified
as major utility services or broadcasting or communication towers are excluded
from this definition and must be approved by special exception consistent with
subsection 3.04.B.27.
      RAIL STATION OR BUS STATION, PASSENGER. A building, structure, or
property used for the boarding of passengers on a train or bus and related
ticketing sales and offices.
      RAILROAD FACILITY. Facilities, buildings, equipment, and yards used in
the operation of a railroad.
      RAILWAY and RAILWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY. A public or private right-of-way on
which tracks for trains are constructed for use by light or heavy rail trains,
including passenger and freight trains.
      REAR YARD. See YARD, REAR.
      RECYCLING CENTER. A facility in which recoverable resources, including
but not limited to, paper, glassware, and metals, are collected, stored,
flattened, crushed, or bundled for shipping to a recycling facility.
      RECYCLING FACILITY. A facility where damaged, inoperable, obsolete, or
used, secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, temporarily stored,
processed, or broken down into raw materials. Recycled materials include, but
are not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, glass, demolished building
materials, automobiles, and machinery.
      RELIGIOUS USE. A place of worship and religious training of recognized
religions, including the on-site housing of ministers, rabbis, priests, nuns,
imams, and similar staff personnel.
      RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM. See SOLAR PANEL, ARRAY or WIND TURBINE.
      RESEARCH OR SCIENTIFIC LABORATORY. An establishment that engages in
research, testing or evaluation of materials or products, but not necessarily
medical related.
      RESIDENCE HOTEL (EXTENDED STAY HOTEL). See HOTEL, EXTENDED STAY.
      RESIDENTIAL USE. Residential use means use of a structure as a dwelling
unit designed to be occupied by at least one family but not including boarding
house, hotel, hotel, extended stay, or motel.
      RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS. See Table 2: Zoning Districts for a list of
districts.
      RESOURCE EXTRACTION (OIL AND GAS). Drilling, production, or distribution
activity related to oil and gas extraction as regulated under the Tex. Natural
Resources Code.
      RESTAURANT OR CAFETERIA, WITH DRIVE-THRU. An establishment, with drive-up
window where food and drink are prepared and consumed primarily off-premises.
      RESTAURANT OR CAFETERIA, WITHOUT DRIVE-THRU. An establishment where food
and drink are prepared and consumed primarily on the premises, but which may
include takeout or curbside service for consumption off-premises.
      RETAIL STORES AND SHOPS. An establishment engaged in the selling of goods
and merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and
rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.
      RETIREMENT HOUSING. Any age restricted housing development that may be in
any housing form, including detached and attached dwelling units and
apartments, offering private and semiprivate rooms and designed to provide
meals and nursing care to persons aged 55 or over.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY.
         a.   A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street
or alley or other transportation infrastructure.
         b.   A RIGHT-OF-WAY may be used for other facilities and utilities,
such as sidewalks, railroad crossings, electrical communication, oil or gas,
water or sanitary or storm sewer facilities, or for any other use.
         c.   The use of RIGHT-OF-WAY shall also include parkways and medians
outside of pavement.
      RV PARK. A designated and defined parcel of land within a recreational
vehicle park intended for occupation by a recreational vehicle for no longer
than 30 consecutive days.
      SCHOOL, CAREER. An organization offering a curriculum or course of study
leading to credentialing in a recognized profession such as trade school,
information technology, dental assistant, pharmacy technician, nurse aide,
veterinary assistant, etc.
      SCHOOL, COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY. Includes colleges or universities
providing a post-secondary education and issuing a degree for a course of study
in the arts, humanities, sciences, or other advanced field of study other than
school, career.
      SCHOOL, K-12. Includes school facilities providing primary and post-
secondary education to students in kindergarten to 12th grade.
      SEAMSTRESS OR TAILOR SHOP. Establishments primarily engaged in
manufacturing or modifying clothing.
      SECONDHAND STORE. The sale of used items or goods not principally donated
to the seller by the previous owner (see THRIFT STORE).
      SELF-STORAGE (MINI WAREHOUSE FACILITIES). A building(s) containing
separate, individual self-storage units for rent or lease and generally used
for storing household or personal items or vehicles, including boats and
recreational vehicles (RVs) but not for bulk storage, storage of hazardous
materials, or occupation by humans or animals.
      SETBACK LINE. A line within a lot, parallel to and measured from a
corresponding lot line, establishing the minimum required yard and governing
the placement of structures and uses on the lot.
      SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. A sex parlor, nude studio, modeling studio,
love parlor, adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult video arcade, adult
movie arcade, adult video store, adult motel, or other commercial enterprise
the primary business of which is the offering of a service or the selling,
renting, or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual
stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer.
      SHOE REPAIR SHOP. An establishment with the principal business of
repairing shoes.
      SIDE YARD. See YARD, SIDE.
      SIGHT VISIBILITY TRIANGLE. A space left open and unobstructed by fences,
structures, shrubs, trees, or other plant life along streets at the corner in
front of the building line of lots contiguous to intersecting streets. Also
called "intersection sight triangle."
      SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENTIAL. See DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY
(DETACHED).
      SITE PLAN. A site plan is a detailed, scaled drawing of all surface
improvements, structures, and utilities proposed for development and is
associated with the zoning ordinance.
      SKETCH PLAN. An informal plan drawn to approximate scale by hand or using
basic non-technical software that depicts the general layout of a development
site. SKETCH PLANS are generally for the purpose of discussion only, such as a
pre-application conference, and are not suitable for detailed technical review.
      SLAUGHTERHOUSE. A commercial facility used for the slaughtering and
processing of animals and the refining and distribution of byproducts from
slaughtering.
      SMALL ENGINE REPAIR SHOP. A shop for the repair of lawnmowers, chainsaws,
lawn equipment, and other small engine equipment and machinery than can be
conveyed by hand by a single person of average strength.
      SMELTER, REFINERY, or CHEMICAL PLANT. A building or facility for refining
or processing oil or a chemical plant for producing chemical products or
processing of those products.
      SOLAR PANEL OR ARRAY (MOUNTED ON BUILDING OR STRUCTURE). A solar
collector or other device not exceeding the maximum height of a building or
structure (if mounted on a building or structure) that relies upon sunshine as
an energy source and is capable of collecting, distributing, and storing the
sun's radiant energy for a beneficial use such as electrical power.
      SOLAR PANEL OR ARRAY (GROUND INSTALLATION). A solar collector or other
device not exceeding the maximum height, setback, or lot coverage for an
accessory structure (if installed on the ground) that relies upon sunshine as
an energy source and is capable of collecting, distributing, and storing the
sun's radiant energy for a beneficial use such as electrical power.
      SPECIAL ZONING DISTRICTS. A zoning district as listed a special zoning
district within Table 2: Zoning Districts.
      SPECIFIC USE PERMIT (SUP).
         a.   A zoning procedure to allow a specific use on a property.
         b.   See subsection 5.09 for procedures.
         c.   See Use Chart for which zoning districts allow a SPECIFIC USE
PERMIT (SUP).
      STORY. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a
floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above. Also the vertical
distance between two successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces and,
for the topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the
ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the roof
rafters.
      STABLE.
         a.   COMMERCIAL OR BOARDING STABLE. A building or shelter where
animals or livestock such as horses, sheep, goats, and pigs are kept either for
compensation by a person other than the owner of the animals or for the purpose
of making the animals available to the general public for a commercial purpose
such as riding.
         b.   PRIVATE STABLE. A building or shelter where animals or livestock
such as horses, sheep, goats, and pigs are kept by the owner of the animals.
      STREET. A public right-of-way that provides vehicular traffic access to
adjacent lands or for the movement of through traffic.
      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected that requires location on the
ground or attached to something having a location on the ground, including, but
not limited to freestanding canopies, pergolas, gazebos, carports, advertising
signs, billboards, and poster panels, but not including fences, retaining
walls, sidewalks, or curbs. For STRUCTURES designed for habitation, see
BUILDING.
      SUBDIVIDER.
         a.   Any person or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide
land so as to constitute a subdivision.
         b.   In any event, the term SUBDIVIDER shall be restricted to include
only the owner, equitable owner or authorized agent of such owner or equitable
owner, of land to be subdivided.
      SUBDIVISION.
         a.   The division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more parts
or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building
development or transfer of ownership with the exception of transfer to heirs of
an estate, and shall include re-subdivision.
         b.   Any other subdivision or re-subdivision of land contemplated by
the provisions of Tex. Local Gov’t Code Chapter 212.
      SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS. The adopted subdivision regulations of the city.
      SUNDRY STORE. A retail store, also commonly referred to and promoted and
advertised as a dime or dollar store, selling various small items such as dry
goods, toiletries, household supplies, frozen food, and other perishable and
nonperishable food.
      SUP. See SPECIFIC USE PERMIT (SUP).
      SURVEYOR. A licensed state land surveyor or a registered public surveyor,
as authorized by the state to practice the profession of surveying.
      SWIMMING POOL. An outdoor pool designed for one or more persons to
immerse themselves for recreational or exercise use. A SWIMMING POOL contains
at least 24 inches of average depth and 150 square feet of surface area
constructed either in-ground, above ground, or a combination and includes a
system of pumps and filters to recirculate and chemically sanitize the pool
water for human occupation.
      TATTOO OR PIERCING STUDIO.
         a.   TATTOO OR TATTOOING. The practice of producing an indelible mark
or figure on the human body by scarring or inserting a pigment under the skin
using needles, scalpels, or related equipment. The term includes the
application of permanent cosmetics.
         b.   PIERCING. The creation of an opening in an individual's body,
other than in an individual's earlobe, to insert jewelry or another decoration.
      TAXI GARAGE or DISPATCHER. A service that offers transportation in
passenger automobiles and vans to persons including those who are handicapped
in return for remuneration. The business may include facilities for servicing,
repairing, and fueling the taxicabs or vans.
      TAXIDERMIST. An establishment whose principal business is the practice of
preparing, stuffing, and mounting the skins of dead animals for exhibition in a
lifelike state.
      TEMPORARY BUILDING FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION.
         a.   A structure or shelter used in connection with the construction
of a development or building project for housing on the site of temporary
administration and supervisory functions and for sheltering employees and
equipment.
         b.   Buildings are permitted for a specific period of time in
accordance with a permit issued by the city.
      TEMPORARY ON-SITE STORAGE UNIT OR CONTAINER. A transportable structure or
container no more than 20 feet in length used primarily for temporary storage
of building materials, household goods, personal items, or other materials (see
subsection 3.04.B.25 Temporary On-Site Storage Unit or Container Standards).
      TEXTILE MANUFACTURING. Establishments primarily engaged in finishing of
textiles, fabrics, and apparel, with dust and odor controls.
      THEATER, DRIVE-IN. See MOVIE THEATRE, DRIVE IN.
      THEATER, LIVE PERFORMANCE (INDOOR). An indoor facility or establishment
where theater, recitals, orchestra, or similar productions are performed live
for patrons or attendees.
      THEATER, LIVE PERFORMANCE (OUTDOOR). An outdoor or open-air facility or
establishment where theater, recitals, orchestra, or similar productions are
performed live for patrons or attendees.
      THRIFT STORE. A business or organization that engages in or specializes
in the sale or resale of previously owned or used goods that are primarily
donated to the seller. A specialty retail store that sells used merchandise not
donated for sale, including but not limited to used record stores, used book
stores, used furniture stores, and sports trading card stores, shall not be
considered a THRIFT STORE for the purpose of this ordinance.
      TOBACCO, VAPOR, E-CIGARETTE STORE. An establishment principally for the
retail sale of sealed containers of tobacco or nicotine products or similar
devices, including e-cigarettes. Tobacco product means any tobacco, cigarette,
cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snuff, or any other form of tobacco,
which may be utilized for smoking, chewing, inhalation or other manner of
ingestion or absorption.
      TOWNHOME. See DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY (ATTACHED - TOWNHOUSE).
      TRAILER. A portable unit designed to move on wheels from location to
location by automobile or truck (for dwelling units commonly moved as a trailer
or moved using a trailer, see MANUFACTURED HOUSING and MOBILE HOME PARKS,
TRAILER PARKS, TRAILER COURTS, or TRAILER SUBDIVISIONS).
      TRANSITIONAL HOME FACILITY. See HALFWAY HOUSE.
      TRUCK. See HEAVY LOAD VEHICLE.
      TRUCK TERMINAL. An area and building where cargo is stored and where
trucks, including tractor and trailer units, load and unload cargo on a regular
basis. May include facilities for the temporary storage of loads prior to
shipment.
      UTILITY DISTRIBUTION/TRANSMISSION LINE. Facilities, including subsidiary
stations that serve to distribute, transmit, transform, or reduce the pressure
of gas, water, or electric current, including, but not limited to, electrical
transmission lines, gas transmission lines, and metering stations.
      UTILITY EASEMENT. See EASEMENT.
      VETERINARIAN CLINIC (NO OUTDOOR KENNELS). An establishment where animals
and pets are admitted for examination and medical treatment that contains
outdoor kennels on site.
      VETERINARIAN CLINIC (WITH OUTDOOR KENNELS). An establishment where
animals and pets are admitted for examination and medical treatment that does
not contain outdoor kennels on site.
      WAREHOUSE/DISTRIBUTION. Facilities characterized by enclosed storage
areas accessed by loading bays designed to accommodate large trucks or semi-
trucks, using ceilings with sufficient clear height according to applicable
standards within the building code and fire code for the stacking of goods and
commodities that are loaded or unloaded using trucks or forklifts.
      WATER STORAGE. Facility for the storage of water, either elevated or
ground level.
      WATER OR WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY. The facility or facilities within
the water supply system that can alter the physical, chemical, or
bacteriological quality of the water, including associated facilities such as
pumping stations and lift stations.
      WEDDING CHAPEL, RECEPTION FACILITY, or SPECIAL EVENTS CENTER. See BANQUET
HALL.
      WHOLESALE CENTER (NO OUTSIDE SALES OR STORAGE). An establishment or place
of business primarily engaged in selling or distributing merchandise to the
general public, to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional, or
professional business users, and to other wholesalers.
      WIND TURBINE. A wind energy conversion device that produces electricity
and does not exceed the maximum allowed height of a building in the zoning
district; typically three blades rotating about a horizontal axis and
positioned up-wind of the supporting tower.
      WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEM.
         a.   A system of equipment for communication purpose by cable,
telegraph, telephone, or wireless broadcast and includes antenna support
structures for mobile and land based telecommunications.
         b.   Systems include whip antennas, panel antennas, microwave dishes
and receive-only satellite dishes, cell enhancers and related equipment for
wireless transmission from a sender to one or more receivers, such as for
mobile or cellular telephones, mobile radio systems facilities, commercial
mobile radio service and radio or television (commercial only) broadcasting
towers and transmitting stations.
         c.   This definition is inclusive of the placement of the above-
referenced equipment on a monopole tower, a steel lattice tower, guyed steel
lattice tower and any communication tower which does or does not utilize guy
wire support in addition to existing buildings or other independent support
structures. This system shall also allow as one of its components an unmanned
equipment shelter.
      WOODWORKING AND PLANING MILL. Establishments with dust and noise control
and primarily engaged in one or more of the following:
         a.   Manufacturing dimension lumber from purchased lumber;
         b.   Manufacturing dimension stock (i.e., shapes) or cut stock;
         c.   Re-sawing the output of sawmills; and
         d.   Planing or levelling the face of purchased lumber.
      These establishments generally use woodworking machinery, such as
jointers, planers, lathes, and routers to shape wood.
      YARD. An open space other than a court, on the same lot with a building,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise
provided herein.
      YARD, FRONT. A yard across the full width of a lot extending from the
front line of the main building to the front property line of the lot.
      YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
measured between the rear property line of the lot and rear line of the main
building, except that area included in the side yard as defined below.
      YARD, SIDE. A yard between the building and the side property line of the
lot and extending from the front yard to the required minimum rear yard.
      ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The city official designated by the City Manager or
Development Director to administer the Zoning Ordinance.
      ZONING DISTRICT MAP. The official map upon which the boundaries of the
various zoning districts are drawn and that is an integral part of the Zoning
Ordinance.
      ZONING ORDINANCE. The adopted Zoning Ordinance of the city, as may be
amended in the future, and may be referred as "the Zoning Ordinance."
(Ord. 04-2022-34, passed 4-12-22; Am. Ord. 02-2023-09, passed 2-28-23; Am. Ord.
04-2025-15, passed 4-22-25)
CHAPTER 156: SIGN REGULATIONS
Section
Legal Provisions
   
156.01   Title
   
156.02   Authority
   
156.03   Purpose
   
156.04   Applicability
   
156.05   Relationship to other regulations
   
156.06   Relationship to private restrictions
   
156.07   Amendments
General Provisions
   
156.20   Exempt signs
   
156.21   Prohibited signs
   
156.22   General requirements
   
156.23   Sign types
   
156.24   Computation and interpretation
   
156.25   Sign features
Sign Standards
   
156.35   Sign districts and sign allocations
   
156.36   Detached signs
   
156.37   Attached signs
   
156.38   Incidental signs
   
156.39   Temporary signs
   
156.40   Special signs
   
156.41   Vehicle signs
   
156.42   Historical signs
Procedures
   
156.55   Sign permit
   
156.56   Master sign plan
   
156.57   Signs in the public right-of-way
   
156.58   Alternative compliance
   
156.59   Variances
   
156.60   Appeals
Nonconformities and Enforcement
   
156.70   Nonconforming and abandoned signs
   
156.71   Enforcement and inspections
Definitions
   
156.80   Generally
   
156.81   Standard definitions
   
156.82   Sign definitions
 
   
156.99   Penalties
LEGAL PROVISIONS
 § 156.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Cleburne Sign Code and referenced as
"this chapter" or as "Sign Code."
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.02 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Texas State Law. The following chapters and sections of the laws of
the State of Texas establish the city's authority that is exercised within this
chapter:
      (1)   Texas Local Government Code, including:
         (a)   Chapter 216 (Regulation of Signs by Municipalities).
      (2)   Texas Transportation Code, including:
         (a)   Chapter 391 (Highway Beautification on Interstate and Primary
Systems and Certain Roads).
         (b)   Chapter 392 (Highway Beautification on State Highway Right-of-
Way).
         (c)   Chapter 393 (Outdoor Signs on Public Rights-of-Way).
         (d)   Chapter 394 (Outdoor Signs on Rural Roads).
         (e)   Chapter 544 (Traffic Signs, Signals, and Markings).
   (B)   Exercise of powers. This chapter is adopted in the exercise of the
power granted by municipalities by these statutes, the City Charter of
Cleburne, and the Texas Constitution.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.03 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate signs of all types (temporary and
permanent) in a manner that:
   (A)   Protects constitutional rights to free speech by preserving
opportunities for expression through signs, while avoiding content-based
distinctions, and providing clear approval standards;
   (B)   Protects public health and safety by:
      (1)   Minimizing visual traffic hazards, distractions, and obstructions
for motorists, cyclists, and pedestrians, or signs causing confusion by virtue
of visual similarity to traffic control signs;
      (2)   Not creating a nuisance to persons using the public rights-of-way;
      (3)   Not causing a nuisance to occupancy of adjacent and contiguous
property by their brightness, size, height, or movement;
      (4)   Minimizing obstructions to firefighting or police surveillance; and
      (5)   Encouraging the upgrading, updating, or removing signs that are
poorly maintained, or do not conform to this chapter, and preventing signs that
are potentially dangerous due to structural deficiencies and disrepair from
hazards caused by collapse, fire, collision, decay, or abandonment.
   (C)   Maintains and enhances the aesthetic environment and the city's
ability to attract sources of economic development and growth by providing
those signs:
      (1)   Promote the community's appearance, character, quality, and
business climate by encouraging signs that are attractive and functional for
their intended purpose, and that are in scale and harmony with the development
site and building(s) and with surrounding areas;
      (2)   Reduce and prevent visual clutter or potential deterioration of the
community's appearance and attractiveness;
      (3)   Implements the goals and policies of the city's adopted planning
policies, commercial and historical overlays, zoning regulations, and
International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) standards by establishing
uniform standards and procedures to regulate the size, type, number, design,
placement, illumination, timeframe for display, and maintenance of signs; and
      (4)   Do not interfere with scenic views.
   (D)   Regulates signs by classifying each sign according to its design and
construction type and by regulating those sign types as they occur within
certain Sign Districts throughout Cleburne. These regulations address the type,
number, size, height, and placement within a site for signs according to their
location in the various Sign Districts.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.04 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   This chapter applies within the city's corporate boundaries, except
as specifically stated otherwise in these sign regulations.
      (2)   This chapter does not prohibit signs required by state or federal
law and does not authorize signs that state or federal law prohibits.
      (3)   No person shall erect, operate, display, or otherwise use any sign
at a time, place, or manner that this chapter prohibits.
   (B)   Exemptions. This chapter does not apply to signs listed in §
156.20.
   (C)   Message neutrality.
      (1)   Content neutrality. Non-commercial speech is not regulated. This
chapter is not intended to limit commercial messaging except to further the
goals and objectives of this chapter. If there are any conflicts between the
regulations of this chapter and a commercial message, the Director will
interpret the regulation so as to create minimal impact on the commercial
message itself.
      (2)   Substitution allowed. Any sign authorized in this chapter may
contain any noncommercial copy or message in place of any other authorized
commercial or noncommercial message without an additional permit or approval so
long as the sign complies with the other requirements of this chapter and other
applicable city ordinances. Message substitution is a continuing right which
may be exercised any number of times. The message substitution right does not:
         (a)   Create a right to increase the total amount of sign display area
on a site or parcel;
         (b)   Create a right to substitute an off-site commercial message in
place of an on-site commercial message;
         (c)   Affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device
must be properly permitted;
         (d)   Authorize changing the physical method of image presentation
(such as digital or neon) display without a permit; or
         (e)   Authorize a physical change to the sign structure without
compliance with this chapter or applicable building codes, safety codes, and
applicable rules for sign size, height, orientation, setback, separation, or
illumination.
   (D)   Signs within Planned Developments (PDs).
      (1)   Applicability. This chapter shall apply to signs within a PD unless
otherwise specified within the PD adopting ordinance. To the extent that a sign
plan does not address the type, area, height, design features, or other sign
requirements, this chapter shall apply to those features.
      (2)   Master sign plans. The master sign plan shall comply with the
requirements established in §
156.56.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.05 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGULATIONS.
   Generally, refer to Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 211.013 (Conflict with Other
Laws) if this chapter conflicts with other regulations. Except as provided in
Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 211.013 (Conflict with Other Laws), if any provision of
this chapter conflicts with state or federal law, state or federal law
controls.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.06 RELATIONSHIP TO PRIVATE RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter does not abrogate any deed restriction, covenant, or any other
private agreement or restriction on the use of signage on private property.
However, if the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive or impose
higher standards than any private restriction, the requirements of this chapter
control. Where the provisions of any private restriction are more restrictive
or impose higher standards than the provisions of this chapter, the private
restrictions control if properly enforced by a person having the legal right to
enforce those restrictions. The city shall not enforce private restrictions.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.07 AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to this chapter shall be adopted by ordinance of the City
Council. Amendments may be initiated by the City Council or considered upon
recommendation of the City Manager or designated Director. Public hearings or
notices shall be provided at the City Council's discretion, unless otherwise
required by law.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.20 EXEMPT SIGNS.
   (A)   Generally. Changing the face of a sign does not require a sign permit,
provided that the change is made to an existing sign face, without changing the
sign type, height, size, or shape.
   (B)   Exemptions. The following signs are exempt from the regulations of
this chapter:
      (1)   Any signs and signals properly authorized by law, signs authorized
by statute or a state agency in accordance with the Texas Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, and other traffic signals, public warnings, or legal
notices, provided that such signs or signals are installed in a location and in
a manner and condition required by federal or state statute, a state agency, or
a city ordinance or authorized authority.
      (2)   Nonconforming signs and existing billboards as defined in this
chapter.
      (3)   Signs required or established by governmental bodies or agencies
having proper jurisdiction for a public purpose by law, statute, or ordinance.
This includes any signs:
         (a)   The City Council decides by ordinance or resolution to erect
within its corporate boundaries or on any real property that it may own or
control;
         (b)   Erected by the city (temporarily or otherwise) that directs
vehicular or pedestrian traffic, which may display arrows, words, or other
symbols to indicate directions;
         (c)   Erected by governmental bodies or agencies serving the public;
         (d)   Signage as permitted within any portion of this chapter on
public property with the permission and under the supervision of the city; or
         (e)   In a plaza or public space structures located in the city's
right-of-way, that are installed and maintained by the city or a contractor
authorized by the city.
      (4)   Signs on vehicles, trailers, or equipment are exempted only to the
extent such signs are incidental to the primary use of the vehicle, trailer, or
equipment, provided that the vehicle, trailer, or equipment is in good
mechanical repair and is not left in one place for more than 72 hours without
being moved.
      (5)   Address numerals and other similar information required to be
maintained by law or governmental order, rule or regulation, provided that the
size of the sign may not exceed the requirements of such law, order, rule, or
regulation.
      (6)   Signs contained within a walled, fenced, or secured property or
area that are not visible from a right-of-way.
      (7)   Signs used as score boards in athletic stadiums.
      (8)   Signs located within or immediately adjacent to building entrances
or interior foyers, provided such signs are intended for on-site
identification, directory, or informational purposes and are not designed to be
visible from a public street or right-of-way.
      (9)   Seasonal decorations customarily displayed during federally
recognized holidays.
      (10)   Signs placed on public property designated as an official polling
place on a designated election day so long as such signs are located outside
the specified distance from the polling place entrance as permitted by state
election laws.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.21 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs and related objects are prohibited from being installed
or publicly displayed at any location within the city's corporate boundaries,
except as otherwise specifically prescribed within this chapter, and if after
authorized issuance of a city-issued sign permit required by this chapter.
   (A)   New billboards.
   (B)   Moving and flashing signs, including signs that flash, blink, pulse/
pulsate, flicker, revolve, rotate, swing, undulate or otherwise attract
attention through the movement or flashing of lights, LEDs, or other parts, or
through the impression of movement or flashing. However, this prohibition shall
not apply to:
      (1)   Signs that are fully located within an enclosed building that are
not visible from public right-of-way; and
      (2)   Temporary signs that may move or fluctuate and have a valid permit.
   (C)   Signs which employ a motion picture machine, or which display moving
images, or images which give the impression of motion, including those using
digital display.
   (D)   Signs which are of a size, location, movement, content, coloring, or
manner of illumination, which may be confused with or construed as a traffic-
control device or which hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal, or
which obstruct the view in any direction at a street or road intersection. This
also includes signs that use a revolving beam or beacon resembling any
emergency vehicle, or are located or illuminated in such a manner as to obscure
or otherwise interfere with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign,
signal or device, or so as to prevent any traveler on any street from obtaining
a clear view of approaching vehicles for a distance of at least 250 feet along
the street.
   (E)   Signs placed on or affixed to vehicles, trailers, or equipment that
are parked on a public right-of-way, public property, or private property so as
to be visible from a public right-of-way where the apparent purpose is to
direct people to a business or activity located on the same or another nearby
property.
   (F)   No person shall attach any sign, paper or other material to, or paint,
stencil or write anything on, or otherwise mark on any sidewalk, curb, gutter,
street utility pole, tree, shrubs, hydrant, bridge, traffic-control device,
street sign, public building or structure in, on, over, or within a public
street, sidewalk, alley, easement, or right-of-way unless authorized by this
chapter, by the City Council or its delegated representatives.
   (G)   No person shall erect or allow to be erected any sign in, on or over
public rights-of-way and easements, railroad right-of-way or designated fire
lanes unless specifically exempted by this chapter or unless erected under a
valid, unexpired permit as specifically set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
   (H)   Bandit signs for the use of off premise temporary advertising.
   (I)   No person shall paint a sign or attach a sign to the exterior of a
fence or railing except in certain circumstances as determined by the Director.
   (J)   Signs which do not comply with any applicable provision of a building
code, electrical code, or other applicable code or ordinance of the city.
   (K)   Messages displayed from searchlights.
   (L)   Signs that are in disrepair to the extent that the cost of repair
would exceed 50% of the value of a similar sign if purchased new and signs in
danger of falling or that are otherwise unsafe to the public.
   (M)   Signs that display holographic projections of diffracted light.
   (N)   Signs that are located on or that interfere with the use of public
sidewalks, required off-street parking areas, or vehicle maneuvering areas
unless specifically regulated in §§
156.35 through
156.42.
   (O)   A non-traffic sign is prohibited within the sight visibility triangle
at intersections, defined by a diagonal line connecting points 25 feet from the
street corner on each property line or their extensions to the curb lines.
   Figure 1: Site Visibility Triangle
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8077.jpg]
   (P)   Signs (illuminated from within or without) that are illuminated in
such a manner, to such intensity, or without shielding that is greater than the
prescribed amounts in §
156.37, so as to constitute a hazard to the operation of motor vehicles upon a
street or substantially interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of property.
   (Q)   Signs located on private property without the consent of the owner of
the property.
   (R)   Off-premise outdoor commercial advertising signs.
   (S)   All signs not expressly allowed, exempted, or permitted under this
chapter.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.22 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Installation.
      (1)   Signs and sign structures shall comply with the city's adopted
building codes and all other regulatory requirements.
      (2)   An applicant shall provide all applicable plans and obtain permits
before installing any sign.
   (B)   Maintenance.
      (1)   All signs, together with any supports, braces, guys and anchors,
structural components and footings, and colors, shall remain in good repair and
be properly maintained.
      (2)   For wall signs, the sign installation area on the building wall
shall be cleaned, patched, and painted upon sign removal.
      (3)   Any defective signs or damaged parts or components of a sign shall
be replaced. Upon notice from the city to replace damaged or missing components
of the sign, the owner has until the time specified in the notice to make the
repairs.
      (4)   All components of a sign shall keep the adjacent properties free of
debris, weeds, trash, or other public nuisances.
      (5)   The Director may enforce the standards as provided in §
156.70 and §
156.71.
   (C)   Vertical clearance for signs projecting over sidewalks, walkways, and
driveways.
      (1)   The bottom edge of any projecting sign, attached awning/canopy
sign, hanging sign, marquee sign, and any other sign that extends or projects
over a sidewalk, walkway, or driveway shall be at least eight feet above grade
as shown in §
156.35, unless specified elsewhere in this chapter.
      (2)   Projecting signs, attached awning/canopy signs, hanging signs,
marquee signs, and any other sign that extends or projects over public
sidewalks shall not extend into or occupy more than half the width of the
sidewalk or five feet (whichever is less), as measured from the building wall.
   (D)   Signs in right-of-way. No person shall place or install a sign or
supporting structures within the right-of-way of any public street except as
provided in §
156.57.
   (E)   Administrative interpretations. Interpretations of this chapter are to
be made initially by the Director. All interpretations of this chapter are to
be exercised considering the message neutrality and message substitution
policies. Where a particular type of sign is proposed, and the type is neither
expressly allowed nor prohibited by this chapter, or whenever a sign does not
qualify as a "structure" as defined in the building code, as adopted by the
city, the Director shall approve or disapprove the application based on the
most similar sign type that is legal under the current code, using physical and
structural similarity, that is expressly regulated by this chapter. Appeal to
the City Council over denial of an application may be taken, as provided in §
156.59.
   (F)   Responsibility for compliance. The responsibility for compliance with
this chapter rests jointly and severally upon the sign owner, the permit
holder, all parties holding the present right of possession, and control of the
property where a sign is located, mounted, or installed.
   (G)   Billboards. New billboards are prohibited. Existing legal
nonconforming billboards may not be converted to digital billboards.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.23 SIGN TYPES.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   This chapter establishes the required standards for signs from the
following sign categories:
         (a)   Detached signs;
         (b)   Attached signs;
         (c)   Incidental signs;
         (d)   Temporary signs;
         (e)   Special signs;
         (f)   Vehicle signs; and
         (g)   Historical signs.
      (2)   This classification system provides flexibility for persons and
businesses who display signs, avoids sign distinctions that depend on a sign's
message, supports the community's aesthetic goals, and avoids potential traffic
hazards and clutter.
   (B)   Generally. Sections and subsections in §§
156.35  through
156.42 for each sign type address the following standards:
      (1)   An introductory paragraph defining the sign type;
      (2)   Images or graphics that illustrate the sign type;
      (3)   A table summarizing the applicable sign standards, including:
         (a)   If the sign type is allowed in the designated areas provided in
§
156.35;
         (b)   If a sign permit is required;
         (c)   The maximum number of signs of each type;
         (d)   Maximum sign dimensions, including:
            1.   Sign area;
            2.   Height;
            3.   Location/setbacks; and
            4.   Other requirements.
         (e)   If the sign features provided in §
156.25 are allowed or required:
            1.   Electronic message centers;
            2.   Illumination features; and
            3.   Changeable copies; and
            4.   Neon.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.24 COMPUTATION AND INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Sign area, sign faces and sign application.
      (1)   Sign area. Sign area means the area enclosed by the smallest
imaginary regular shape (e.g., parallelogram, triangle, circle, trapezoid) or
combination of regular shapes that will encompass the extreme limits of the
writing, representation, emblem, or other display, or combination thereof,
together with any material or color forming an integral part of the display or
used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it
is placed. Sign area includes such features as decorative or ornamental
elements or features, borders, trims, but not including the architectural
enclosure or supporting structure which is used solely for support of the sign,
such as poles, columns and cables, pylons, or other architectural enclosures.
      (2)   Sign faces. When a sign has multiple faces, the sign area shall be
calculated as follows:
         (a)   One-sided sign. The area will be the area of the one face.
         (b)   Two-sided sign, front and back. The sign area is calculated
separately for each side. The area of each side shall not exceed the maximum
permitted sign area.
         (c)   Signs faces on different planes of a sign structure.
            1.   Two sign faces where the interior angle between the two faces
is 45 degrees or less. The sign area is calculated separately for each sign
face. The maximum permitted sign area applies to each sign face.
            2.   Two sign faces where the interior angle between the two faces
is greater than 45 degrees. The sign area is the sum of the individual sign
faces. The combined sign area of the two faces shall not exceed the maximum
permitted sign area.
   Figure 2: Measurement of Sign Face (1 or 2 faces)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8079.jpg]
            3.   Where more than two sign faces exist on a single sign
structure, the sign area is the sum of the individual sign faces. The combined
sign area of the faces shall not exceed the maximum permitted sign area as
shown in the graphic below.
         (d)   All signs on a single supporting structure shall be measured
together as though they were one sign to determine the total sign area, except
that signs separated by more than 36 inches of air space at every point between
the signs, and not separated by being located on different planes of a sign
structure, shall be measured separately and added together to determine the
total sign area.
         (e)   Irregular shaped signs. The sign area is the area enclosed by
the smallest imaginary regular shape, or combination of shapes, which would
fully contain all portions of the sign when rotated horizontally around the
sign. Marquee signs are not considered freeform if information is only
displayed on the front and back.
   (B)   Manner of measurement. The measurement required for signs by this
chapter shall be made using the following procedures:
      (1)   Setback. To apply the setback provisions of this chapter for signs
at any one point, the following measuring procedure shall be used:
         (a)   Draw an imaginary vertical line extending upwards from the curb-
line of the premises;
         (b)   Beginning at any point on the vertical line, draw an imaginary
horizontal line perpendicular to the vertical line and curb-line extending
toward the premises; and
         (c)   Beginning at the point where the vertical line intersects the
horizontal line, measure along the horizontal line for the required setback.
      (2)   Height. The maximum height of a sign mounted to the ground shall be
determined by the method of measurement that allows the greater height, as
follows:
         (a)   Curb-line measurement. Measure along a vertical line extended
upward from the nearest curb-line of the public street fronting the premises
where the sign is to be located, to the maximum height allowed for the sign.
From that point, extend a horizontal line to where the sign is to be located.
The horizontal line is the maximum height allowed at that location for that
Sign District.
         (b)   Street level measurement. Along US Highway 67 and the Chisholm
Trail Parkway, the height of a sign may be measured from the principal lane,
the frontage road, or the ground, whichever allows the greatest height. At the
highest point of the sign, draw a horizontal line to the outer extremities of
the sign. At the center of the horizontal line, draw a vertical line to the
street level (the level of the principal lane, the frontage road or the
ground). The vertical line may not exceed the height allowed for a sign at that
location for that Sign District.
         (c)   Natural ground level measurement. At the highest point of the
sign, draw a horizontal line to the outer extremities of the sign. At the
center of the horizontal line, draw a vertical line to the natural ground level
below (the "natural ground level" shall include any changes in topography
necessary for development of the property). The vertical line may not exceed
the height allowed for the sign at that location for that Sign District.
   (C)   Sign measurement variables. Signs may be allocated by:
      (1)   Lot;
      (2)   Storefront;
      (3)   Entrance;
      (4)   Grounded canopy;
      (5)   Window; or
      (6)   Building.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.25 SIGN FEATURES.
   Signs may incorporate the following features established below; however,
these features shall only be allowed as established in the tables in §
156.35.
   (A)   Illumination.
      (1)   Generally.
         (a)   A sign that is "illuminated" means any sign that incorporates
illumination on or in the sign, or that directs illumination toward or over all
or part of the sign, or that is created by the projection of illuminations onto
a surface (such as a building wall).
         (b)   Permanent signs may be illuminated by static and continuous
internal and external illumination configurations as indicated in the tables in
§§
156.35 through
156.42 for each sign type.
         (c)   Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Signs that are illuminated shall not operate at brightness
levels of more than 0.5 foot-candles (5.38 lux) above ambient light conditions
at the property line, as measured using a foot-candle meter. Illumination
levels shall be measured in foot-candles with a meter sensor in a horizontal
position at an approximate height of three feet above grade.
         (b)   Illumination shall not include animation, moving video, or
flashing, scrolling, intermittent, moving lights, rotating beams or flashing
beacon lights.
         (c)   Signs that are illuminated shall not be illuminated by flashing,
intermittent, or moving lights or lights that consist of an image projected
upon a stationary object.
         (d)   The illumination source for a sign or building shall be shielded
from view from any point on the ground by either an opaque or translucent
material.
         (e)   Illumination shall comply with all applicable provisions of the
city's Adopted Electrical Code.
         (f)   Signs with illumination in or within 100 feet of a residential
area shall be reduced to 50% of the maximum brightness level allowed by this
subchapter between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   (B)   Electronic message centers.
      (1)   Generally.
         (a)   A sign that incorporates an electronic message center (EMC)
means a sign that displays a digital copy, including any illuminated sign on
which the illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and
color when the sign is in use, including any light emitting diode (LED) or
digital panel, and which varies in color or intensity.
         (b)   Permanent signs may incorporate EMCs as indicated in the tables
in §§
156.35 through
156.42 for each sign type.
         (c)   Temporary signs shall not incorporate EMCs.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Hold time.
            1.   Each message on the sign must be displayed for at least 15
seconds duration.
            2.   Message changes shall be completed instantaneously and shall
be imperceptible.
         (b)   Electronic copy.
            1.   Signs incorporating EMCs shall only contain static messages
changed exclusively by dissolve or fade transitions, and shall not have
movement or the appearance or optical illusion of movement during the static
display period of any part of the sign.
            2.   A static message shall not include any flashing or varying of
light intensity, and the message shall not scroll.
            3.   The change of message using dissolve or fade transition shall
not exceed two seconds of time between each message displayed on the sign.
         (c)   Brightness.
            1.   The intensity of the light source for an EMC shall not produce
glare, the effect of which constitutes a traffic hazard or is otherwise
detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare.
            2.   An EMC shall not operate at brightness levels of more than 0.5
foot-candles (5.38 lux) above ambient light conditions at the property line, as
measured using a foot-candle meter. Illumination levels shall be measured in
foot-candles with a meter sensor in a horizontal position at an approximate
height of three feet above grade.
            3.   Prior to the issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall
provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light
intensity has been factory pre-set not to exceed 0.5 foot-candles (5.38 lux)
above ambient light and that the intensity level is protected by the end-user
of the sign.
         (d)   Technology.
            1.   The technology currently being deployed for EMCs is Light
Emitting Diode (LED), but there may be alternate, preferred, or superior
technology available in the future that may be considered by the Director.
            2.   Any other technology that complies with the performance
standards for EMCs, including the maximum brightness levels as stated in §§
156.20 through
156.25 is permitted.
         (e)   Automatic shutoff. An EMC shall:
            1.   Have automatic dimmer software or solar sensors to control
brightness for nighttime viewing and variations in daytime ambient light;
            2.   Include systems and monitoring to either turn the display off,
show "full black" on the display, or include a default mechanism that freezes
the sign in one position if a malfunction occurs;
            3.   Be designed so that a catastrophic power surge will cause the
sign to go dark or to deploy the maximum brightness limitations; and
            4.   Automatically adjust the intensity of its display according to
natural ambient light conditions.
         (f)   Resolution.
            1.   EMC faces shall have a pixel pitch of no more than 16
millimeters.
               a.   PIXEL PITCH means a measurement of the resolution of a
digital display, in terms of the distance (generally in millimeters) between
the center of a LED cluster (pixel) and the center of the next LED pixel.
               b.   A lower pixel pitch measurement indicates a higher display
resolution.
            2.   This section only applies to sign(s) that are constructed,
rebuilt, or replaced after the effective date of this chapter.
      (3)   Maintenance.
         (a)   The sign owner shall provide the Director with the phone number
and email address of a person who is available to be contacted at any time and
who is able to turn off the EMC promptly after a malfunction occurs.
         (b)   The light modules on EMCs shall be repaired or replaced as they
become broken, burned-out, or substantially dimmed.
   (C)   Changeable copy.
      (1)   Generally. Permanent signs may incorporate changeable copy as
indicated in the tables in §§ 156.35 through 156.42 for each sign type.
      (2)   Standards. Changeable copies may be illuminated if the dimensions
and standards allow illumination for the sign type in the particular Sign
District.
   (D)   Neon.
      (1)   Generally.
         (a)   Only permanent, attached signs within the boundaries of the DTC
(Downtown Core Overlay), as defined in the zoning ordinance, may incorporate
neon. Although overlays are not otherwise used for regulating sign features in
this chapter, the DTC is maintained as an exception due to its distinct
character and design standards applicable to the downtown area regardless of
underlying zoning.
         (b)   Temporary signs shall not incorporate neon.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Neon may be shaped to form objects or letters, or to outline
portions of a sign.
         (b)   Neon letters or characters may appear as a freestanding object,
mounted directly on a wall surface, mounted on a panel, or contained in open
channel letters.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
SIGN STANDARDS
§ 156.35 SIGN DISTRICTS AND SIGN ALLOCATIONS.
   (A)   Sign Districts. This chapter regulates signs by location. The city’s
zoning ordinance regulates use, setbacks, building size, site design, and land
use allowances by zoning districts. For the purposes of this chapter, zoning
districts are organized into sign districts to produce desirable sign outcomes.
The sign districts are established in Table 1: Sign Districts.
Table 1: Sign Districts
Sign District Zoning District
Table 1: Sign Districts
Sign District      Zoning District
AG (Agricultural)  A
                   SF-6
                   SF-7
SF (Single-Family) SF-10
                   SF-20
                   D
MF (Multi-Family)  MF-1
                   MF-2
                   NC
CM (Commercial)    LC
                   RC
MU (Mixed-Use)     MU
IN (Industrial)    CI
                   I
      Note: The DTC (Downtown Core Overlay), as defined in the Zoning
Ordinance, is the only overlay referenced in this chapter and remains
applicable for specific features such as neon signs.
   (B)   Sign permit requirements by Sign District. This chapter’s permitting
requirements for each sign type references the sections and subsections that
apply to each sign type.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.36 DETACHED SIGNS.
   (A)   Detached signs are classified into one of the following sign types:
monument (major and minor) signs, pole (major and minor) signs, or subdivision
entry signs. Their associated regulations are established in this subchapter.
      (1)   A lot may have one detached sign, but not two or more unless
specified elsewhere in this section.
      (2)   A lot that has two or more road frontages may have no more than one
sign per frontage that does not exceed the maximum size in Table 2.
      (3)   No lot may have multiple detached signs of the same type with the
exception of multiple minor monument signs.
   (B)   Major monument signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8083.jpg]
      (1)   Definition. A permanent detached multi-tenant sign with a low
profile, a base, and a support structure with a solid appearance that is at
least 75% of the width of the widest part of the sign’s face.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Generally.
   Table 2: Major Monument Sign Standards
Table 2: Major Monument Sign Standards
Table 2: Major Monument Sign Standards
Sign
District     AG   SF   MF   CM    MU    IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?     NR   NR   NR   T     T     T
Number per   1    1    1    1     1     1
lot (max.)
Dimensions
Sign Height  20   20   20   35    30    35 ft.
(max.)       ft.  ft.  ft.  ft.   ft.
Sign Area    150  150  175  300   250   300 sf
(max.)       sf   sf   sf   sf    sf
Setbacks (min).
From front   10   10   10
property     ft   ft   ft   10 ft 10 ft 10 ft
line
From
adjacent     5 ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft  5 ft  5 ft
property
lines
Features
Electronic
message      NR   NR   NR   T     T     T
center
Changeable   NR   NR   NR   T     T     T
copy
Internal     NR   NR   NR   T     T     T
illumination
External     NR   NR   NR   T     T     T
illumination
Additional Information
             T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/not
Key          allowed NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for
             nonresidential uses only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the
             standard does not apply
 
         (b)   Number.
            1.   This section generally allows one double-sided major monument
sign for each lot fronting a street for the sign districts shown in Table 2:
Major Monument Sign Standards.
            2.   No major monument sign is allowed on a lot without frontage on
to a street.
         (c)   Design and installation.
            1.   When electrical service is provided to a major monument sign,
all electrical service shall be underground or concealed with the structure.
            2.   Major monument signs shall be designed to withstand wind loads
established by the Adopted Building Code.
            3.   All major monument signs shall be placed in concrete bases or
footings.
            4.   Major monument signs shall be constructed only of materials
that are noncombustible or slow-burning in the case of plastic inserts and
faces and may be supported by noncombustible material only, and finished in a
presentable manner. Untreated or non- engineered wood or non-painted steel
supports are specifically prohibited.
            5.   The design, materials, and finish of an individual major
monument sign shall be designed and finished to a standard that is similar to
the principal building or buildings on the lot.
            6.   Major monument signs may be composed of a changeable copy or
an electronic message center based on the standards in §
156.25 and the allowances for these features established in Table 2: Major
Monument Sign Standards.
   (C)   Minor monument signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8085.jpg]
      (1)   Definition. A permanent detached single-tenant sign with a low
profile, a base, and a support structure with a solid appearance that is at
least 75% of the width of the widest part of the sign’s face.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Generally.
   Table 3: Minor Monument Sign Standards
Table 3: Minor Monument Sign Standards
Sign District AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
Table 3: Minor Monument Sign Standards
Sign
District     AG   SF   MF   CM    MU    IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?     NR   NR   NR   T     T     T
Number per   1    1    1    1     1     1
lot (max.)
Dimensions
Sign Height  8    8    8    10    8 ft. 10 ft.
(max.)       ft.  ft.  ft.  ft.
Sign Area    100  100  120  120   120   120 sf
(max.)       sf   sf   sf   sf    sf
Setbacks (min).
From front   10   10   10
property     ft   ft   ft   10 ft 10 ft 10 ft
line
From
adjacent     5 ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft  5 ft  5 ft
property
lines
Features
Electronic
message      NR   NR   NR   T     T     T
center
Changeable   NR   NR   NR   T     T     T
copy
Internal     NR   NR   NR   T     T     T
illumination
External     NR   NR   NR   T     T     T
illumination
Additional Information
             T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/not
Key          allowed NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for
             nonresidential uses only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the
             standard does not apply
 
         (b)   Number.
            1.   This division generally allows one double-sided minor monument
sign for each lot fronting a street for the sign districts shown in Table 3:
Minor Monument Sign Standards, unless the lot fronts multiple arterial or
collector streets, in which case an additional minor monument sign is allowed
for each street frontage.
            2.   No minor monument sign is allowed on a lot without frontage on
to a street.
         (c)   Design and installation.
            1.   When electrical service is provided to a minor monument sign,
all electrical service shall be underground or concealed with the structure.
            2.   Minor monument signs shall be designed to withstand wind loads
established by the Adopted Building Code.
            3.   All minor monument signs shall be placed in concrete bases or
footings.
            4.   Minor monument signs shall be constructed only of materials
that are noncombustible or slow-burning in the case of plastic inserts and
faces and may be supported by noncombustible material only, and finished in a
presentable manner. Untreated or non-engineered wood or non-painted steel
supports are specifically prohibited.
            5.   The design, materials, and finish of an individual minor
monument sign shall be designed and finished to a standard that is similar to
the principal building or buildings on the lot.
            6.   Minor monument signs may be composed of a changeable copy or
an electronic message center based on the standards of §
156.25 and the allowances for these features established in Table 3: Minor
Monument Sign Standards.
   (D)   Major pole signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8087.jpg]
      (1)   Definition. A permanent detached multi-tenant sign in which the
sign face is mounted on one or more poles and the base of the sign face is
situated more than 12 inches above the ground. A major pole sign does not
include a flag mounted on a flagpole.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Generally.
   Table 4: Major Pole Sign Standards
Table 4: Major Pole Sign Standards
Sign District AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
Table 4: Major Pole Sign Standards
Sign
District     AG  SF MF CM  MU IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?     NR  X  X  T   X  T
Number per   1   -  -  1   -  1
lot (max.)
Dimensions
Sign Height  25  -  -  30  -  30 ft
(max.)       ft        ft
Sign Area    150 -  -  250 -  250 sf
(max.)       sf        sf
Setbacks (min).
From front   10        10
property     ft  -  -  ft  -  10 ft
line
From
adjacent     5   -  -  5   -  5 ft
property     ft        ft
lines
Features
Electronic
message      NR  -  -  T   -  T
center
Changeable   NR  -  -  T   -  T
copy
Internal     NR  -  -  T   -  T
illumination
External     NR  -  -  T   -  T
illumination
Additional Information
             T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/not
Key          allowed NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for
             nonresidential uses only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the
             standard does not apply
 
         (b)   Number. This division allows one double-sided major pole sign
for each lot fronting a street for the Sign Districts shown in Table 4: Major
Pole Sign Standards.
         (c)   Location. No major pole sign is allowed on a lot without
frontage on to an arterial or collector street.
         (d)   Design and installation.
            1.   Major pole signs shall be designed to withstand wind loads
established by the Adopted Building Code.
            2.   All major pole signs shall be placed in concrete bases or
footings.
            3.   Major pole signs shall be constructed only of materials that
are noncombustible or slow-burning in the case of plastic inserts and faces and
may be supported by noncombustible material only and finished in a presentable
manner. Untreated or non-engineered wood or non-painted steel supports are
specifically prohibited.
            4.   Major pole signs shall not have attached any guys or braces.
            5.   When electrical service is provided to a major pole sign, all
electrical service shall be underground or concealed with the structure.
   (E)   Minor pole signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8089.jpg]
      (1)   Definition. A permanent detached single-tenant sign in which the
sign face is mounted on one or more poles and the base of the sign face is
situated more than 12 inches above the ground. A minor pole sign does not
include a flag mounted on a flagpole.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Generally.
   Table 5: Minor Pole Sign Standards
Table 5: Minor Pole Sign Standards
Sign District AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
Table 5: Minor Pole Sign Standards
Sign
District     AG  SF MF CM  MU IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?     NR  X  X  T   X  T
Number per   1   -  -  1   -  1
lot (max.)
Dimensions
Sign Height  20  -  -  20  -  20 ft
(max.)       ft        ft
Sign Area    100 -  -  100 -  100 sf
(max.)       sf        sf
Setbacks (min).
From front   10        10
property     ft  -  -  ft  -  10 ft
line
From
adjacent     5   -  -  5   -  5 ft
property     ft        ft
lines
Features
Electronic
message      NR  -  -  T   -  T
center
Changeable   NR  -  -  T   -  T
copy
Internal     NR  -  -  T   -  T
illumination
External     NR  -  -  T   -  T
illumination
Additional Information
             T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/not
Key          allowed NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for
             nonresidential uses only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the
             standard does not apply
 
         (b)   Number. This section allows one double-sided minor pole sign for
each lot fronting a street for the sign districts shown in Table 5: Minor Pole
Sign Standards.
         (c)   Location. No minor pole sign is allowed on a lot without
frontage on to an arterial or collector street.
         (d)   Design and installation.
            1.   Minor pole signs shall be designed to withstand wind loads
established by the Adopted Building Code.
            2.   All minor pole signs shall be placed in concrete bases or
footings.
            3.   Minor pole signs shall be constructed only of materials that
are noncombustible or slow-burning in the case of plastic inserts and faces and
may be supported by noncombustible material only and finished in a presentable
manner. Untreated or non-engineered wood or non-painted steel supports are
specifically prohibited.
            4.   Minor pole signs shall not have attached any guys or braces.
            5.   When electrical service is provided to a minor pole sign, all
electrical service shall be underground or concealed with the structure.
   (F)   Subdivision entry signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8091.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8093.jpg]
      (1)   Definition. A specific detached sign, either in the form of a minor
monument sign or double poled/columned sign, located at the entry of a platted
subdivision from a local, collector, or arterial street.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Generally.
   Table 6: Subdivision Entry Sign Standards
Table 6: Subdivision Entry Sign Standards
Sign District AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
Table 6: Subdivision Entry Sign Standards
Sign
District     AG   SF   MF   CM MU    IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?                 X  T     X
Number per
entrance
minor        1    2    2    -  1     -
monument
(max.)
Number per
entrance     1    1    1    -  1     -
pole/column
(max.)
Dimensions
Sigh height
minor        8 ft 8 ft 8 ft -  8 ft  -
monument
(max.)
Sign height  22   22   22
pole/column  ft   ft   ft   -  22 ft --
(max.)
Sign area
minor        150  200  200  -  150   -
monument     sf   ft   ft      sft
(max.)
Sign area
pole/column  -    -    -    -  -     -
(max.)
Features
Electronic
message      X    X    X    -  X     -
center
Changeable   X    X    X    -  X     -
copy
Internal     X    X    X    -  X     -
illumination
External     T    T    T    -  T     -
illumination
Additional Information
             T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/not
Key          allowed NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for
             nonresidential uses only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the
             standard does not apply
 
         (b)   Number and location. Subdivision entry signs may be located at
the intersection of a collector or arterial street and an entry street or
private driveway into a subdivision. The signs shall be configured as follows:
            1.   Two single-sided signs each located on opposite sides of the
entry street or private driveway;
            2.   One double-sided sign located within a landscaped area
dividing two one-way entry streets or private driveways;
            3.   One single-sided sign located on one side of the entry street
or private driveway; or
            4.   One single-sided sign located on either side of the entry
street or private driveway that spans the street and complies with §
156.36.
         (c)   Design and installation.
            1.   Generally.
               a.   A subdivision entry sign and its supporting structures may
be permitted in a public right-of-way pursuant to §
156.57.
               b.   Subdivision entry signs shall be constructed with stone,
brick, concrete, metal, routed wood planks or beams, or similar durable,
weatherproof materials.
               c.   When electrical service is provided to a subdivision entry
sign, all electrical service shall be underground.
            2.   Interaction with public right-of-ways. A subdivision entry
sign and its supporting structures may project into a public right-of-way
pursuant to §
156.57  and when the following conditions are met:
               a.   A minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet is provided from
the base of the sign and its supporting structures to the surface of the public
right-of-way;
               b.   All sign supporting structures (i.e., vertical piers,
columns, posts, etc.) shall be set back at least five feet from the edge of
curb; and
               c.   In no instance shall a subdivision entry sign and its
supporting structures exceed 25 feet in height.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.37 ATTACHED SIGNS.
   Attached signs are classified into one of the following sign types: wall
signs, attached awning/canopy signs, hanging signs, grounded canopy signs,
marquee signs, projecting signs or window signs. Their associated regulations
are established in this section. A building may have multiple attached signs,
unless specified elsewhere in this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8095.jpg]
      (1)   Definition. A permanent attached sign (other than an incidental
sign) that is affixed on an exterior building wall, and projects less than 18
inches from the wall to which it is attached (this projection includes
letters).
      (2)   Standards.
   (a)   Generally.
   Table 7: Wall Sign Standards
   Table 7: Wall Sign Standards
Sign District AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
   Table 7: Wall Sign Standards
Sign
District     AG  SF  MF  CM  MU  IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?     NR  NR  NR  T   T   T
Dimensions
Sign area
(max. % of
wall area    10% 10% 10% 25% 20% 30%
for all wall
signs)
Features
Electronic
message      X   X   X   X   X   X
center
Changeable   X   NR  X   X   X   X
copy
Internal     NR  NR  NR  T   T   T
illumination
External     NR  NR  NR  T   T   T
illumination
Additional Information
             T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/not allowed
Key          NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for nonresidential uses
             only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the standard does not apply
 
      (3)   Number. There is no limit to the amount of wall signs allowed on a
building; however, in no instance shall the cumulative wall sign allowance
exceed the requirements in Table 7: Wall Sign Standards, unless specified
otherwise in this chapter.
      (4)   Design and installation.
         1.   A wall sign shall affix flush against the wall of the building or
as flush as possible while allowing the plane of the face of the sign to remain
perpendicular to the ground.
         2.   The wall sign's face shall not extend more than 18 inches from
the surface of the wall to which it is attached.
         3.   A wall sign shall be located below the building's roof line or in
instances where a parapet exists, located on the parapet.
   (B)   Attached awning/canopy signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8097.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8099.jpg]
      (1)   Definition. A sign painted, printed, attached, or otherwise applied
to any facet of the covering or frame structure of an awning or attached
structural canopy.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Generally.
   Table 8: Attached Awning/Canopy Sign Standards
Table 8: Attached Awning/Canopy Sign Standards
Sign District AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
Table 8: Attached Awning/Canopy Sign Standards
Sign
District     AG SF MF CM MU    IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?     NR X  NR T  T     T
Dimensions
Sign area    50 -  50 90 50 sf 50 sf
(max.)       sf    sf sf
Features
Electronic
message      X  -  X  X  X     X
center
Changeable   X  -  X  X  X     X
copy
Internal     NR -  NR T  T     T
illumination
External     NR -  NR T  T     T
illumination
Additional Information
              T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/
Key          not allowed NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for
             nonresidential uses only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the
             standard does not apply
 
         (b)   In addition to wall sign. Attached awning/canopy signs may be
displayed in addition to a wall sign on any exterior wall on which a wall sign
is allowed under this section.
         (c)   Design and installation.
            1.   Attached awning/canopy signs may be printed, attached, or
directly applied to the surface of the awning covering.
            2.   An attached awning/canopy sign shall not extend from the
surface of the awning to which it is affixed.
   (C)   Hanging signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8101.jpg]
      (1)   Definition. A sign suspended from the underside of a canopy,
awning, ceiling, marquee, roof overhang, a covered porch, or walkway.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Generally.
   Table 9: Hanging Sign Standards
Table 9: Hanging Sign Standards
Sign District AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
Table 9: Hanging Sign Standards
Sign
District     AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?       X  X  T  T  T
Number per
storefront   1  -  -  1  1  1
(max.)
Dimensions
Sign area    20 -  -  20 20 20 sf
(max.)       sf       sf sf
Vertical     8        8  8
clearance    ft -  -  ft ft 8 ft
(min.)
Sign         4        4  4
projection   ft -  -  ft ft 4 ft
(max.)
Features
Electronic
message      X  -  -  X  X  X
center
Changeable   X  -  -  X  X  X
copy
Internal     T  -  -  T  T  T
illumination
External     T  -  -  T  T  T
illumination
Additional Information
             T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/
Key          not allowed NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for
             nonresidential uses only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the
             standard does not apply
 
         (b)   Design and installation.
            1.   A hanging sign shall affix to the surface of the wall so that
the face of the sign remains perpendicular to the ground.
            2.   No hanging sign shall project above a street.
   (D)   Grounded canopy signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8103.jpg]
      (1)   Definition. A permanent attached sign that is affixed to a grounded
canopy. A grounded canopy is a permanent structure that is structurally
independent of a building affixed to the ground, that is of rigid construction,
and over which a covering is attached that provides weather protection,
identity, or decoration.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Generally.
   Table 10: Grounded Canopy Sign Standards
Table 10: Grounded Canopy Sign Standards
Sign District AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
Table 10: Grounded Canopy Sign Standards
Sign
District     AG SF MF CM  MU IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?     NR X  X  T   T  T
Dimensions
Sign area    50 -  -  100 50 100 sf
(max.)       sf       sf  sf
Sign         1        1   1
projection   ft -  -  ft  ft 1 ft
(max.)
Features
Electronic
message      X  -  -  T   T  T
center
Changeable   NR -  -  T   T  T
copy
Internal     NR -  -  T   T  T
illumination
External     X  -  -  X   X  X
illumination
Additional Information
             T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/
Key          not allowed NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for
             nonresidential uses only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the
             standard does not apply
 
         (b)   Number.
            1.   One sign may be displayed on each street frontage in which
that grounded canopy is located.
            2.   Grounded canopy signs are an additional allowance for signs
provided by this section.
         (c)   Design and installation.
            1.   A grounded canopy sign shall affix flush against the surface
of the face of the grounded canopy or as flush as possible while still allowing
the plane of the face of the sign to remain perpendicular to the ground.
            2.   The face of a grounded canopy sign shall not extend above the
top surface of the face of the grounded canopy to which it is attached.
   (E)   Marquee signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8105.jpg]
      (1)   Definition. A permanent attached sign affixed to a marquee.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Generally.
   Table 11: Marquee Sign Standards
Table 11: Marquee Sign Standards
Sign District AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
Table 11: Marquee Sign Standards
Sign
District     AG SF MF CM  MU  IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?     X  X  X  T   T   X
Number per
storefront   -  -  -  1   1   -
(max.)
Dimensions
Sign area    -  -  -  25% 25% -
(max.)
Vertical              8   8
clearance    -  -  -  ft  ft  -
(min.)
Sign                  10  10
projection   -  -  -  ft  ft  -
(max.)
Features
Electronic
message      -  -  -  X   X   X
center
Changeable   -  -  -  T   T   T
copy
Internal     -  -  -  T   T   T
illumination
External     -  -  -  T   T   T
illumination
Additional Information
             T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/not
Key          allowed NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for
             nonresidential uses only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the standard
             does not apply
 
         (b)   Number. One marquee sign may be displayed in addition to other
signs allowed in this section.
         (c)   Additional allowances. The maximum sign area for a marquee sign
may be increased to 35% for a single-story building.
         (d)   Design and installation.
            1.   A marquee sign shall be located above the primary public
entrance of a building.
            2.   No marquee sign shall project above a street.
   (F)   Projecting signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8107.jpg]
      (1)   Definition. A permanent attached sign that is affixed to and
projects 18 inches or more from the wall of a building and is generally
perpendicular to the building facade. A projecting sign does not include signs
located on an attached canopy, awning, marquee, or roof.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Generally.
   Table 12: Projecting Sign Standards
Table 12: Projecting Sign Standards
Sign District AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
Table 12: Projecting Sign Standards
Sign
District     AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?     X  X  X  T  T  X
Number per
storefront   1  -  -  1  1  1
(max.)
Dimensions
Sign area    20 -  -  20 20 20 sf
(max.)       Sf       sf sf
Vertical     8        8  8
clearance    ft -  -  ft ft 8 ft
(min.)
Sign         5        5  5
projection   ft -  -  ft ft -
(max.)
Features
Electronic
message      -  -  -  X  X  -
center
Changeable   -  -  -  X  X  -
copy
Internal     -  -  -  T  T  -
illumination
External     -  -  -  T  T  -
illumination
Additional Information
             T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/
Key          not allowed NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for
             nonresidential uses only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the
             standard does not apply
 
         (b)   Substitution for wall signs, attached awning/canopy signs, and
hanging signs. Projecting signs may be substituted for a wall sign, attached
awing/canopy sign, or hanging sign on any exterior wall on which a wall sign,
attached awing/canopy sign, or hanging sign is allowed under this section.
         (c)   Design and installation.
            1.   A projecting sign shall affix to the surface of the wall so
that the face of the sign remains perpendicular to the ground.
            2.   A sloping line defines allowable increases in the maximum
projection of a projecting sign. The maximum projection angle is 20 degrees,
provided that the projection does not project over a street, vehicular way, or
fire lane.
   (G)   Window signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8109.jpg]
      (1)   Definition. A sign posted, printed, placed, or affixed to a window
or glass door. A window sign includes any sign that is located inside a
building, that is three feet or less from a window or glass door, and that is
intended to be visible from outside the building.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Generally.
   Table 13: Window Sign Standards
Table 13: Window Sign Standards
Sign District AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
Table 13: Window Sign Standards
Sign
District     AG  SF MF  CM  MU  IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?     X   X  T   T   T   T
Number per
window
facing       1   -  1   1   2   1
street
(max.)
Dimensions
Sign height  10  -  10  12  12  10 ft
(max.)       ft     ft  ft  ft
Sign area    35% -  35% 40% 40% 35%
(max.)
Features
Electronic
message      X   -  X   X   X   X
center
Changeable   X   -  X   X   X   X
copy
Internal     NR  -  T   T   T   T
illumination
External     NR  -  T   T   T   T
illumination
Additional Information
             T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/not
Key          allowed NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for
             nonresidential uses only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the
             standard does not apply
 
         (b)   Design and installation.
            1.   Window signs shall be posted or affixed to the window.
            2.   No window sign shall be drawn or painted onto the window. This
does not include seasonal images.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.38 INCIDENTAL SIGNS.
   Incidental signs are classified into one of the following sign types:
detached way finding and directional signs. Their associated regulations are
established in this section. A lot may have multiple incidental signs as
allowed in this section.
   (A)   General incidental signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8112.jpg]
      (1)   Definition. A small permanent sign that is freestanding in addition
to the primary sign types for the property, such as detached signs and attached
signs, and that has a height and scale that is clearly subordinate to the
primary sign types (monument signs, pole signs, wall signs, etc.) allowed for
the property. Examples of typical general incidental signs include house
numbers, occupant directories, property or tenant identification names or
numbers, wayfinding signs, and directional signs, and signs warning the public
against trespassing or danger from animals. The list of examples is not
exhaustive and is provided to clarify the regulations and does not limit the
content of general incidental signs. The city will not review the content of
general incidental signs.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Generally.
   Table 14: General Incidental Sign Standards
Table 14: General Incidental Sign Standards
Sign District AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
Table 14: General Incidental Sign Standards
Sign
District     AG SF MF   CM   MU   IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?     NR NR T    T    T    T
Dimensions
Sign height  6  6  6 ft 6 ft 6 ft 6 ft
(max.)       ft ft
Incidental
sign area    45 45 45   90   45   90 sf
per lot      sf sf sf   sf   sf
(max.)
Features
Electronic
message      X  X  X    X    X    X
center
Changeable   X  X  X    X    X    X
copy
Internal     NR NR T    T    T    T
illumination
External     T  T  T    T    T    T
illumination
Additional Information
              T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/
Key          not allowed NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for
             nonresidential uses only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the
             standard does not apply
 
         (b)   Number.
            1.   There is no maximum general incidental sign per lot allowance.
            2.   The sum of the general incidental sign area on a lot shall not
exceed those established in Table 14: General Incidental Sign Standards.
         (c)   Design and installation.
            1.   A detached general incidental sign shall have an enclosed or
decorative/painted base and be securely and firmly embedded in the ground.
            2.   Incidental signs constructed in conjunction with a ground sign
shall be consistent with the building elements and materials of those
established on the same lot and within the development.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.39 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   Temporary signs are classified into one of the following sign types: general
temporary signs, sidewalk signs, attached banners, detached banners, or feather
signs. Their associated regulations are established in this section. A building
or lot may have multiple temporary signs as allowed in this section. A
temporary sign shall not be used as a placeholder for detached and attached
signs unless specified elsewhere in this chapter.
   (A)   General temporary signs.
      (1)   Definition. A sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric,
cardboard, wood, wallboard, metal, high-density or corrugated plastic, or other
light materials, with or without frames, which is intended to be displayed for
a limited period of time only. Examples of typical general temporary signs
include political signs, public demonstrations, contractor or service-based
signs (such as those for construction, repairs, installation, landscaping,
cleaning, or other on-site services), grand opening signs, garage sale signs
and signs that announce an event such as a carnival, circus, or similar event.
The list of examples is not exhaustive and is provided to clarify the
regulations and does not limit the content of general temporary signs. The city
will not review the content of general temporary signs.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Generally.
   Table 15: General Temporary Sign Standards
Table 15: General Temporary Sign Standards
Sign District AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
Table 15: General Temporary Sign Standards
Sign
District     AG SF MF   CM   MU   IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?     T  T  T    T    T    T
Number per
street       1  1  1    2    2    2
frontage
(max.)
Dimensions
Sign height  4  4  4 ft 4 ft 4 ft 4 ft
(max.)       ft ft
Sign area    20 20 20   20   20   20 sf
(max.)       sf sf sf   sf   sf
Setbacks (min.)
From front   15 15 15   15   15
property     ft ft ft   ft   ft   15 ft
line
Features
Electronic
message      X  X  X    X    X    X
center
Changeable   X  X  X    T    T    T
copy
Internal     X  X  X    X    X    X
illumination
External     X  X  X    T    T    T
illumination
Additional Information
             T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/
Key          not allowed NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for
             nonresidential uses only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the
             standard does not apply
 
         (b)   Duration.
            1.   A general temporary sign may be displayed for:
               a.   No more than 30 consecutive days, three times during a
calendar year, separated by at least 14 calendar days.
            2.   The number of days for a general temporary sign shall not be
carried over to another display duration.
         (c)   Design and installation.
            1.   A detached general temporary sign shall be securely and firmly
embedded in or on the ground.
            2.   A detached general temporary sign may not deflect more than
ten degrees from vertical, unless designed to move or bend structurally with
the wind.
            3.   A detached general temporary sign shall not use sandbags or
other weighted objects to secure the sign to or in the ground.
            4.   No general temporary sign shall use an adhesive (tape, glue,
etc.) to affix the sign to any surface.
         (d)   Exemptions for general temporary signs within a residential
buffer.
            1.   General temporary signs located within a ten foot buffer
surrounding a residential dwelling shall be exempt from regulations, provided
that the following conditions are met:
               a.   The sign is placed entirely within the ten foot buffer
surrounding the residence; and
               b.   The total sign area does not exceed 20 square feet.
            2.   Examples of signs qualifying for this exemption include, but
are limited to signs expressing noncommercial, personal messages such as:
               a.   Academic achievement signs (e.g., honor student
recognition);
               b.   Collegiate affiliation signs; and
               c.   Other noncommercial expressional of personal milestones,
service, or affiliation (e.g., military service, graduation, birthdays, or
similar personal celebrations).
         (e)   Exceptions for temporary signs on active or transitional sites.
The following additional temporary signs are permitted on certain lots based on
their development status or use transition. These signs are allowed in addition
to the baseline allowances in Table 15, and may exceed the standard height,
area, setback, and duration limitations, provided they comply with the specific
standards outlined below:
            1.   Signs on lots with active development or building permits. One
temporary sign is allowed per street frontage on any lot with an active
building permit or approved site development permit.
               a.   Maximum sign area:
                  (i)   Eight square feet in residential districts.
                  (ii)   One hundred square feet in nonresidential districts.
               b.   Maximum height for non-residential districts. 15 feet.
               c.   Duration. Must be removed within seven days of the closure
of the building permit or final inspection approval.
            2.   Signs on undeveloped, unplatted, or vacant property. One
temporary sign is allowed per street frontage, with a maximum of two signs per
lot.
               a.   Minimum separation: 500 feet between signs on the same lot.
               b.   Minimum setback: 50 feet from the property line or right-
of-way, whichever is greater.
               c.   Maximum sign area: 100 square feet.
               d.   Maximum height: 15 feet.
               e.   Duration: Must be removed within 30 days after the property
is sold, leased, or occupied.
            3.   Signs for property under lease, sale, or occupancy transition.
One temporary sign is allowed per lot where a building, unit, or site is
actively for sale, lease, or undergoing a change of occupancy or use.
               a.   Residential property:
                  (i)   Maximum sign area: 8 square feet.
                  (ii)   Non-illuminated.
               b.   Nonresidential property:
                  (i)   Maximum sign area: 100 square feet.
                  (ii)   Shall not exceed the height of the building wall.
               c.   Duration: Must be removed within seven days of lease or
sale completion.
            4.   Temporary subdivision or development phase signs. One
temporary sign is allowed per subdivision entrance or development phase to
provide information related to lot availability, models, or development status.
               a.   Maximum sign area: 100 square feet.
               b.   Maximum height: 15 feet.
               c.   Duration: Must be removed within seven days of the final
sale or lease of all lots in the associated phase.
            5.   General conditions for all signs in this section. All signs
permitted under this section:
               a.   Must be located entirely on private property with the
consent of the owner.
               b.   Shall not be illuminated or contain electronic message
centers.
               c.   Are not subject to the height, area, duration, and setback
limitations in Table 15, unless specifically stated within the applicable
section.
               d.   Where a specific standard is not provided for a sign's
height, area, setback, or duration, the corresponding limitation in Table 15
shall apply by default.
         (f)   State law exemptions and regulations for political signs.
            1.   Per the Tex. Election Code § 259.003 the city may not, for a
sign that contains primarily a political message and that is located on private
real property with the consent of the property owner:
               a.   Prohibit the sign from being placed;
               b.   Require a permit or approval of the municipality, or impose
a fee for the sign to be placed;
               c.   Restrict the size of the sign; or
               d.   Provide for a charge for the removal of a political sign
that is greater than the charge for removal of other signs regulated by
ordinance.
            2.   Division (A)(2)(e)1. above does not apply to a sign, including
a billboard, that contains primarily a political message on a temporary basis
and that is generally available for rent or purchase to carry commercial
advertising or other messages that are not primarily political.
            3.   Division (A)(2)(e)1. above does not apply to a sign that:
               a.   Has an effective area greater than 36 feet;
               b.   Is more than eight feet high;
               c.   Is illuminated; or
               d.   Has any moving elements.
   (B)   Sidewalk signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8114.jpg]
      (1)   Definition. A temporary and portable sign that is ordinarily in the
shape of an “A” or inverted “T” with back-to-back sign faces, an easel, or a
similar configuration to be located on a sidewalk or walkway.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Generally.
   Table 16: Sidewalk Sign Standards
Table 16: Sidewalk Sign Standards
Sign District AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
Table 16: Sidewalk Sign Standards
Sign
District     AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?     X  X  X  T  T  X
Number per
street       -  -  -  1  1  -
frontage
(max.)
Dimensions
Sign height  -  -  -  4  4  -
(max.)                ft ft
Sign area    -  -  -  12 12 -
(max.)                sf sf
Features
Electronic
message      -  -  -  X  X  -
center
Changeable   -  -  -  T  T  -
copy
Internal     -  -  -  X  X  -
illumination
External     -  -  -  X  X  -
illumination
Additional Information
             T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/not
Key          allowed NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for
             nonresidential uses only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the
             standard does not apply
 
         (b)   Duration. All sidewalk signs shall only be displayed during a
use's business hours.
         (c)   Design and installation.
            1.   Sidewalk signs are allowed only on the surface of a dedicated
sidewalk or pedestrian pathway.
            2.   Sidewalk signs are allowed only where a building is within a
maximum setback, or where a frontage that includes an entryway open to the
general public during normal business hours is within ten feet of the edge of a
public sidewalk.
            3.   Sidewalk signs shall leave a five-foot minimum, unobstructed
sidewalk clearance or as otherwise required by the ADA and city fire lane
requirements, whichever is greater.
            4.   Sidewalk signs shall have no permanent attachments to the
sidewalk.
            5.   Sidewalk signs shall be composed of wood, medium-density
fiberboard, high-density or corrugated plastic, metal (iron or steel) frames,
or other materials with equivalent weight and density.
            6.   The sign face of a sidewalk sign may include a chalkboard or
dry-erase board.
   (C)   Attached banners.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8116.jpg]
      (1)   Definition. A temporary sign made of fabric, cloth, bunting,
plastic, paper, or any other non-rigid material with no enclosing framework
that is attached, mounted, tied, or otherwise placed on a building or pole
attached to a building. This definition does not include flags, pennants, or
streamers.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Generally.
   Table 17: Attached Banner Standards
Table 17: Attached Banner Standards
Sign District AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
Table 17: Attached Banner Standards
Sign
District     AG SF MF CM    MU    IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?     NR NR T  T     T     T
Number per
street       1  1  1  1     1     1
frontage
(max.)
Dimensions
Sign height  15 15 15 15 ft 15 ft 15 ft
(max.)       ft ft ft
Sign area    50 25 50 100   50 sf 100 sf
(max.)       sf sf sf sf
Features
Electronic
message      X  X  X  X     X     X
center
Changeable   X  X  X  X     X     X
copy
Internal     X  X  X  X     X     X
illumination
External     X  X  X  X     X     X
illumination
Additional Information
             T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/
Key          not allowed NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for
             nonresidential uses only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the
             standard does not apply
 
         (b)   Duration. All attached banners shall meet the requirements
established in §
156.37.
         (c)   Design and installation.
            1.   Attached banners shall not be attached to any window, door, or
other sign.
            2.   Attached banners shall be securely affixed to the building.
   (D)   Detached banners.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8118.jpg]
      (1)   Definition. A temporary, freestanding sign made of fabric, cloth,
bunting, plastic, paper, or any other non-rigid material with no enclosing
framework that affixes to the ground. This definition does not include flags,
pennants, or streamers.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Generally.
   Table 18: Detached Banner Standards
Table 18: Detached Banner Standards
Sign District AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
Table 18: Detached Banner Standards
Sign
District     AG SF   MF   CM   MU   IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?     NR NR   T    T    T    T
Number per   1  1    1    1    1    1
lot (max.)
Dimensions
Sign height  15 15   15   15   15   15 ft
(max.)       ft ft   ft   ft   ft
Sign area    50 25   50   100  50   100 sf
(max.)       sf sf   sf   sf   sf
Setbacks (min.)
From front   5
property     ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft
line
Features
Electronic
message      X  X    X    X    X    X
center
Changeable   X  X    X    X    X    X
copy
Internal     X  X    X    X    X    X
illumination
External     X  X    X    X    X    X
illumination
Additional Information
             T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/not
Key          allowed NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for
             nonresidential uses only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the
             standard does not apply
 
         (b)   Duration. All detached banners shall meet the requirements
established in this chapter.
         (c)   Design and installation. All detached banners shall meet the
requirements established in this chapter.
   (E)   Feather signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8120.jpg]
      (1)   Definition. A temporary, freestanding sign made of flexible
material in the shape of a feather, quill, sail, blade, or teardrop, and
mounted on a solid or flexible pole or cord that affixes to the ground.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Generally.
   Table 19: Feather Sign Standards
Table 19: Feather Sign Standards
Sign District AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
Table 19: Feather Sign Standards
Sign
District     AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?     NR X  T  T  X  T
Number per   3  -  3  3  -  3
lot (max.)
Dimensions
Sign height  10 -  12 14 -  18 ft
(max.)       ft    ft ft
Sign area    12 -  16 20 -  24 sf
(max.)       sf    sf sf
Setbacks (min.)
From front   5     5  5
property     ft -  ft ft -  5 ft
line
Features
Electronic
message      X  -  X  X  -  X
center
Changeable   X  -  X  X  -  X
copy
Internal     X  -  X  X  -  X
illumination
External     X  -  X  X  -  X
illumination
Additional Information
              T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/
Key          not allowed NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for
             nonresidential uses only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the
             standard does not apply
 
      (3)   Duration. All feather signs shall meet the requirements established
in this chapter.
      (4)   Design and installation.
         (a)   All feather signs shall meet the requirements established in
this chapter.
         (b)   The Director may require the applicant to submit manufacturer
specifications for feather signs to verify height and size.
   (F)   Balloon signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8122.jpg]
      (1)   Definition. A temporary sign consisting either of an individual
inflatable device or grouping of inflatable devices, at least three feet in
height or width, with or without a specific message, figures, or designs
attached to its surface, used or intended to be used to attract attention.
Depending upon its size or location, a balloon sign may be considered a
detached or attached sign.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Generally.
   Table 20: Balloon Sign Standards
Table 20: Balloon Sign Standards
Sign District AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
Table 20: Balloon Sign Standards
Sign
District     AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?     X  X  X  T  X  T
Permit       -  -  -  T  -  T
required?
Number per   -  -  -  1  -  1
lot (max.)
Dimensions
Sign height  -  -  -  15 -  15 ft
(max.)                ft
Setbacks (min.)
From front            10
property     -  -  -  ft -  10 ft
line
From
adjacent     -  -  -  5  -  5 ft
property              ft
lines
From                  10
detached     -  -  -  ft -  10 ft
signs
From                  10
incidental   -  -  -  ft -  10 ft
signs
From another          5
temporary    -  -  -  ft -  5 ft
sign
Features
Electronic
message      -  -  -  X  -  X
center
(max.)
Changeable   -  -  -  X  -  X
copy (max.)
Channel      -  -  -  X  -  X
letters
Internal     -  -  -  X  -  X
illumination
External     -  -  -  X  -  X
illumination
Halo         -  -  -  X  -  X
illumination
Additional Information
             T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/not
Key          allowed NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for
             nonresidential uses only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the standard
             does not apply
 
         (b)   Duration. A balloon sign may be displayed for a maximum of 30
calendar days per year.
         (c)   Design and installation.
            1.   Balloon signs of any size are permitted, provided they meet
the minimum setbacks from street rights-of-way and utility easements, and their
height does not exceed the limit established by the underlying zoning district.
Any tethers to free- floating inflatable devices shall be of nonconductive
material and must adhere to the required setbacks.
            2.   Balloons must be securely fastened to prevent excessive
movement and to ensure they do not drift beyond the boundaries established by
the applicable regulations, including required setbacks.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.40 SPECIAL SIGNS.
   Special signs are classified into one sign type: murals. Their associated
regulations are established in this section.
   (A)   Murals.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8124.jpg]
      (1)   Definition. A hand-produced work in which paint is applied by hand
directly on an exterior wall of a building or structure. A mural does not
include:
         (a)   Mechanically produced or computer-generated prints or images,
including digitally printed vinyl sheets and wraps;
         (b)   Works containing electrical or mechanical components; or
         (c)   Works that involve changing or moving images or components.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Generally.
   Table 22: Mural Standards
Table 22: Mural Standards
Sign District AG SF MF CM MU IN
Requirement
Table 22: Mural Standards
Sign
District     AG SF MF CM  MU  IN
Requirement
General
Allowed?     X  X  X  T   T   T
Number per
building     -  -  -  1   1   1
(max.)
Dimensions
Sign area    -  -  -  85% 85% 85%
(max. %)
Features
Electronic
message      -  -  -  X   X   X
center
Changeable   -  -  -  X   X   X
copy
Internal     -  -  -  X   X   X
illumination
External     -  -  -  T   T   T
illumination
Additional Information
             T = yes, a permit is required or the feature is allowed X = no/not allowed
Key          NR = the sign type or characteristic is allowed for nonresidential uses
             only sf = square feet ft = feet “-” = the standard does not apply
 
         (b)   Number. One mural may be displayed on a building in addition to
other signs allowed in this subchapter.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.41 VEHICLE SIGNS.
   (A)   Permit not required . Signs on vehicles do not require a sign permit
but must comply with this section.
   (B)   Vehicle used as a sign. No vehicle (including trailers or other non-
motorized wheeled vehicles carrying signs) shall be parked so that it functions
primarily as a sign unless exempt by §§ 156.20 through 156.25.
   (C)   Factors. Factors to determine whether a vehicle is being used
primarily as a sign include, but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   Is the vehicle parked at a prominent location on the lot?
      (2)   Is the vehicle inoperative and displaying a message?
      (3)   Is the sign easily read by a person in the right-of-way?
      (4)   Is the vehicle parked at the same or similar locations for several
hours during the same day or for several days during the same week?
      (5)   Does the vehicle use lights to display a message, including LEDs,
strobes, or incandescent bulbs?
      (6)   Are there any stated or apparent reasons, other than its function
as a sign, that justify the presence of the vehicle at that location?
   (D)   Presumption of use as a sign. While other factors may also establish a
violation, a vehicle presumptively violates this provision if the first five
questions are affirmative and there is no compelling answer to the sixth
question to justify the parking location as opposed to some less conspicuous
location.
   (E)   Limitations on vehicle signs. Vehicles (including trailers) may have
signs subject to the following limitations;
      (1)   Paper signs, electronic message signs, fabric signs, changeable
copy signs, or signs with a scrolling mechanism to change messages are not
allowed.
      (2)   The vehicle must have current state registration and be maintained
in running order.
      (3)   Signage is limited to a copy that is professionally painted or
printed on vinyl wrap that is maintained in good condition and is not faded or
torn.
      (4)   A vehicle displaying a sign shall be parked no closer than ten feet
from a right-of-way and shall not occupy a parking space, fire lane, or drive
aisle that is required for the principal use on the property.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.42 HISTORICAL SIGNS.
   Certain signs within the city which have been designated as a historical
sign by City Council action shall comply with the requirements of this section.
   (A)   Designation. Based on a survey of potential historic signs produced by
the city and any public nomination of a sign for historical status, the City
Council shall designate the sign or signs which it deems historically
significant as a historical sign. A sign may qualify as a historical sign if
it:
      (1)   Is or has been associated with a business enterprise or public
activity which has made significant contribution to the growth and development
of Cleburne or Johnson County;
      (2)   Is an example of distinctive architectural design prior to the
adoption of this chapter;
      (3)   Is associated with the contributions of a culturally significant
personality, building, or landmark; or
      (4)   Is not dilapidated or deteriorated to a point where it constitutes
a public hazard.
   (B)   Property owner support. The designation of any sign as a historical
sign must be requested by the property owner for designation and the property
owner's commitment for continued maintenance.
   (C)   Continued nonconformance and exemption. A sign which has been
designated as a historical sign is exempt from the standards of this chapter
except those that regulate maintenance. Any maintenance of the sign or
preservation work on the sign which may negate the sign's right to remain in
place as a nonconforming sign will not trigger a requirement to meet the
standards of this chapter in the case of a historical sign. In addition, any
work on the sign for the purpose of restoration or preservation which may
exceed 50% of the cost of replacement shall not trigger a requirement to meet
the standards of this chapter.
   (D)   Demolition. Any demolition permit sought which would lead to or
require the demolition of a sign designated as a historical sign shall be
delayed for 90 days from the date of application for a demolition permit so
that alternate locations for, or other dispositions of, the sign may be
arranged. If a workable alternative is not brought forth within the 90-day
demolition delay period, the sign may be demolished. However, if an alternate
location is agreed upon by the City Council, the demolition permit delay shall
continue for a reasonable period to allow implementation of the alternative. In
no case shall the total demolition delay exceed 120 days.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
PROCEDURES
§ 156.55 SIGN PERMIT.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   A person shall not erect, construct, alter, repair, or relocate any
sign within the city without first obtaining a permit, except as provided for
in this chapter.
      (2)   Sections 156.35 through 156.42 establishes the permitting
requirements for each sign type in each Sign District.
      (3)   Any sign proposed on public property (if city property) must have
prior approval of the City Manager for temporary signs or City Council for
permanent signs to allow the sign.
      (4)   Any sign proposed on private property must have authorization by
the owner of that property to allow the sign.
      (5)   Modifications to an existing sign that consist of a changing of the
sign cabinet, frame, structural support, electrical componentry, or other
structural element will require a permit in accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   Applications.
      (1)   Each sign permit shall require a separate application.
      (2)   The application shall be submitted through the permitting process
and shall include a non-refundable fee set by the City Council.
      (3)   An applicant shall provide the information as required below:
         (a)   All applications for a sign permit shall include a professional
quality colored, drawing with scalable dimensions of the proposed sign showing
the height, width, setbacks, coverage, and areas, as regulated by this chapter.
         (b)   The submittal shall also include a drawing of the building
façade, indicating the proposed location of the sign (if building mounted) and
specifications.
      (4)   The Director may require the submittal of other pertinent
information and/or documentation when, in their opinion, that information is
necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
      (5)   An electrical permit may be required for signage utilizing either
new or existing electrical wiring or connections. The Director shall examine
the plans and specifications submitted with the application to ensure
compliance with the city's Adopted Electrical Code. No sign shall be erected
that violates the city's Adopted Electrical Code.
      (6)   All sign drawings and specifications submitted in accordance with
this chapter shall have the seal of a licensed engineer on all structural and
electrical details and specifications or as applicable per the Director.
   (C)   Review.
      (1)   The Director will review a sign permit application to determine if
it is complete. If the application is incomplete, the Director will provide a
list of items necessary to complete the application within ten business days
after the application was submitted.
      (2)   Based on the type of sign and Sign District as provided in §§
156.35 through
156.42, the Director will review a complete sign permit application for
compliance with this chapter and:
         (a)   Approve the permit; or
         (b)   Issue comments requesting revisions to the permit application.
      (3)   Complete applications that are subject to City Council review and
approval will be placed on the next available agenda.
   (D)   Approval criteria. A permit will be issued if the proposed sign
conforms with all applicable provisions of this chapter and any conditions or
stipulations of any applicable Zoning, Specific Use Permit, Site Plan, Planned
Development, or other Development Plan.
   (E)   Expiration. The Director may void a sign permit if installation does
not commence within six months from the permit approval date. If work
authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned for 45 calendar days from
the date the work commences, the Director may require a new permit to complete
the installation work, even if no changes are made to the original sign permit.
   (F)   Revocation. The Director may revoke a sign permit and order the
modification or removal of the sign if:
      (1)   It is issued in error;
      (2)   It is reasonably foreseeable that the sign may partially or
completely fall in the event of an accident.
      (3)   The sign or sign supporting structure is installed contrary to the
approved permits and plans or in violation of this chapter.
   (G)   Sign maintenance.
      (1)   The repair, routine maintenance, or repainting of an existing sign
deemed conforming or allowed to continue as a nonconforming sign by §§
156.70 and
156.71 does not require a sign permit.
      (2)   Changing the face of a sign shall not require a sign permit,
provided that such a change is made to an existing sign face, without changing
the sign type, height, size or shape.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.56 MASTER SIGN PLAN.
   (A)   Purpose. A Master Sign Plan establishes parameters for the size,
location, and design of signs on a property being constructed or managed as a
unified development or large standalone development to ensure long term
aesthetic compatibility of signage throughout the development.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   A Master Sign Plan is required for:
         (a)   Any nonresidential development that is a part of a Planned
Development greater than five acres and containing two or more buildings;
         (b)   Any unified development in the MU or CM Sign Districts greater
than five acres and containing two or more buildings; or
         (c)   Any nonresidential building greater than 50,000 square feet.
      (2)   A Master Sign Plan shall be submitted to determine:
         (a)   Overall sign locations on a property;
         (b)   The relationship of the signs to surrounding existing, proposed,
and future improvements; and
         (c)   Consistency and uniformity among buildings and signs within the
proposed development.
   (C)   Applications.
      (1)   The application shall be submitted through the permitting process
or as part of the Planned Development application and shall include a non-
refundable fee set by the City Council.
      (2)   An applicant shall provide the information as required below:
         (a)   A professional quality, colored drawing with scalable dimensions
of the proposed signs showing the height, width, setbacks, coverage, and areas,
as regulated by this chapter;
         (b)   A professional quality, colored drawing of the building façade,
indicating the proposed location of the signs (if building mounted) and
specifications; and
         (c)   A professional quality, colored drawing of the site plan
indicating the proposed location of the detached signs and distances from
property lines and structures.
   (D)   Review.
      (1)   The Director will review the Master Sign Plan to determine if it is
complete. If the Master Sign Plan is incomplete, the Director will provide a
list of items necessary to complete the plan within ten business days after the
application was submitted.
      (2)   Once the application is deemed complete, the Director will review
the Master Sign Plan for compliance with this chapter and within ten business
days:
         (a)   Approve the plan; or
         (b)   Issue comments for requested revisions to the plan.
   (E)   Approval criteria. A Master Sign Plan shall be issued if the applicant
can demonstrate to the Director that all signs:
      (1)   Meet the intent of applicable requirements of this chapter;
      (2)   Are appropriately related in form, proportion, scale, color,
materials, surface treatment, overall sign size and the size and style of
lettering to the function and design character of the building or premise on
which they will be displayed;
      (3)   Are placed in a logical location in relation to the overall
composition of the building's façade, orientation, or location; and
      (4)   Use consistent mounting, and coordinate mounting location(s) with
the architectural features of the principal buildings on the site.
   (F)   Appeal . The applicant may appeal the Director's decision to the City
Council pursuant to §
156.60.
   (G)   Expiration.
      (1)   A Master Sign Plan may expire if installation does not commence
within one year from the plan approval date. If work authorized by the plan is
suspended or abandoned for 45 calendar days from the date the work commences,
the Director may require a new plan to complete the installation work, even if
no changes are made to the original Master Sign Plan.
      (2)   A Master Sign Plan included within a Planned Development
Application may expire subject to the expiration of Planned Developments, as
outlined in Section 155.5.08.B of the Zoning Ordinance.
      (3)   In hearing the appeal, the Director will place the item on the next
available City Council agenda. The City Council shall review the Director's
decision, and then act on the appeal. The City Council's decision is final.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.57 SIGNS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Generally. In certain circumstances, a sign may be located within the
public right-of-way provided that the applicant (if not the city) is granted a
right-of-way or license agreement to locate such a sign and its supporting
structures, in accordance with the requirements set forth in this section.
   (B)   City Council authorization. The City Council may, by duly executed
right-of-way or license agreement or by delegation to city staff, grant the
exclusive right to design and maintain a sign within the public right-of-way,
provided that it does not constitute a traffic safety hazard.
   (C)   Sign proposal. Prior to erecting any sign within the public right-of-
way, the applicant shall submit a Sign Proposal including location,
orientation, number of individual signs, and any other information deemed
necessary by the Director.
   (D)   Sign criteria. Signs located in the public-right-of-way shall:
      (1)   Not interfere with the use of the public streets, sidewalks,
walkways, bike and hiking trails;
      (2)   Comply with the intersection visibility requirements of the city;
      (3)   Not obstruct the visibility of motorists, pedestrians, or traffic
control signs; and
      (4)   Not be installed in immediate vicinity of street intersections, if
that sign is a detached sign.
   (E)   The applicant shall be responsible for all construction, installation,
maintenance, and repair of any sign for which a right-of-way or license
agreement is granted. Cost associated with the construction, installation,
maintenance, and repair by the applicant shall not be a cost to the city.
   (F)   Approval procedures for signs in the public right-of-way.
      (1)   All signs in public right-of-way shall have a right-of-way or
license agreement between the applicant and the city.
      (2)   The application for a right-of-way or license agreement shall
include the types, locations, size, area, height, number, materials, design,
and construction of all proposed signs.
      (3)   The application will be submitted to and reviewed by the Director
and once complete, will be placed on the next available City Council agenda.
      (4)   The City Council shall approve or disapprove the right-of-way or
license agreement.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.58 ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Purpose and application.
      (1)   Alternative compliance provides limited administrative flexibility
to address unique physical or site-specific conditions that make full
compliance with the sign regulations impractical.
      (2)   A request for alternative compliance may be submitted for review
and approval with the Sign Permit or Master Sign Plan.
   (B)   Review.
      (1)   The Director will review a request for alternative compliance to
determine if it is complete.
      (2)   If the request is incomplete, the Director will provide a list of
items necessary to complete the application within ten business days.
      (3)   When the Director deems the application complete, the Director will
review the proposed request and:
         (a)   Approve the request; or
         (b)   Issue comments for requested revisions to the request.
   (C)   Approval criteria.
      (1)   The Director may approve alternative compliance from the standards
of this chapter related to sign size, height, location, number, or illumination
if the request meets all of the following:
         (a)   The request is based on physical site conditions such as
topography, utility locations, building configuration, landscaping, or other
permanent features that prevent compliance with standard regulations;
         (b)   The request does not increase the total number of signs
otherwise permitted for the site;
         (c)   The sign does not obstruct or interfere with driver visibility
or sight-distance triangles and complies with applicable safety and structural
standards;
         (d)   The requested deviation does not exceed 20% of the maximum sign
area or height, unless specifically allowed under division (D);
         (e)   The sign is constructed of durable, professional materials
commonly used in permanent signage, and its placement does not block building
entrances, doors, windows, or any access points required for pedestrian,
vehicular, or emergency entry;
         (f)   The sign maintains a consistent level of quality, scale, and
proportionality with existing signage on the same site; and
         (g)   The sign does not produce lighting glare or spillover that
adversely affects traffic or adjacent residential uses.
      (2)   Content neutrality clause.  No decision made under this section
shall be based on the sign's content, message, viewpoint, purpose, or the
identity of the speaker.
   (D)   Flexible standards. The Director may grant requests for alternative
compliance regarding the following standards, in addition to standards listed
in other sections of this chapter:
      (1)   Sign area.
         (a)   The sign area, up to 20% of the general allowance, if the sign
height decreases by one foot for every one square foot increase in sign area.
         (b)   Multiple wall signs located on the same building or storefront
wall if the cumulative wall sign area does not exceed 35% of the building or
storefront wall's area (excluding windows and doors).
      (2)   Sign height.
         (a)   The sign height may exceed the maximum allowance by up to 20% of
the general allowance, provided there is a proportional decrease in sign width
(up to 20%) as the sign extends above the max height.
         (b)   Increasing the effective height of the sign by approving a berm
of up to three feet if one or more of the following conditions are present:
            1.   Utility equipment blocks all or part of the sign;
            2.   Drainage/ponding issues threaten the structural integrity of
the sign; or
            3.   The sign is located within 200 feet of signs that are of equal
or greater height to the proposed sign including the berm.
      (3)   Sign consolidation.
         (a)   Replace one major monument sign with no more than three minor
monument signs on a multi-tenant lot with right-of-way frontage of at least 150
feet provided each sign is no more than 20% of the size allowed for a major
sign in the applicable Sign District.
         (b)   The Director may allow consolidation of multiple smaller signs
into one larger sign under a Master Sign Plan, provided the height is not
increased and driver visibility is preserved.
      (4)   Location adjustments.
         (a)   The Director may reduce required setbacks by up to 20% to
accommodate fixed obstructions such as utilities or easements.
         (b)   A sign may be placed within a required intersection sight
triangle only if:
            1.   There are no feasible alternatives; and
            2.   A certified traffic engineering study (based on AASHTO
guidelines) confirms that the location maintains safe and adequate visibility.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.59 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Authority.
      (1)   The City Council has the authority to hear and grant variances
related to the provisions of this chapter related to the utilization of all
signs.
      (2)   The City Council may authorize a variance to any restriction
established in this chapter or if alternative compliance cannot be achieved.
   (B)   Application. Any applicant who seeks to deviate from the terms of this
chapter may request a variance as a means of relief from the standards of this
chapter. The application must be submitted through the permitting process and
include a non-refundable application fee of $750.
   (C)   Review.
      (1)   The Director will review a variance application to determine if it
is complete.
      (2)   If the application is incomplete, the Director will provide a list
of items necessary to complete the application within ten business days.
      (3)   Once deemed complete, the Director will place the item on the next
available City Council agenda.
   (D)   Approval criteria. City Council may consider the following criteria
when granting a variance to the provisions in this chapter:
      (1)   Special conditions exist which are peculiar to the land, structure,
or building involved and are not applicable to other lands, buildings or
structures in the same vicinity. The city may attach conditions to granting all
or a portion of any variance necessary to achieve the purpose of this chapter;
      (2)   The strict interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
vicinity under the terms of this chapter. This condition of comparable
enjoyment does not apply to properties with signs that predate the adoption of
these restrictions nor those properties that hold vested rights of
nonconformance;
      (3)   The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant and such conditions and circumstances do not merely
constitute monetary hardship or inconveniences;
      (4)   Granting the variance will meet the objectives of this chapter and
not be injurious to the adjoining property owners or otherwise detrimental to
the public welfare;
      (5)   The request will be the minimum variance necessary to alleviate the
special hardship or practical difficulty faced by the applicant in meeting the
requirements of this chapter; and
      (6)   The variance remains consistent with the overall regulatory
framework of this chapter, excluding considerations related to sign content,
message, or viewpoint.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.60 APPEALS.
   (A)   Grievance as a condition for appeal. Any aggrieved person may appeal
the determination of the Director regarding a sign permit by filing an appeal.
   (B)   Appeals of administrative decisions.
      (1)   To determine the suitability of alternative materials and methods
of construction and provide for reasonable interpretation of the provisions of
this chapter, the City Council shall hear appeals about any decision of the
Director regarding a sign permit.
      (2)   Any appeal shall be brought by written application specifying the
grounds for the appeal, filed by the applicant of the sign permit with the
Director within ten business days following the action which is the subject of
the appeal.
      (3)   Enforcement of this chapter shall be stayed pending the appeal.
      (4)   The Director will place the item on the next available City Council
agenda. In hearing the appeal, the City Council shall review the Director's
decision, and then act on the appeal. The City Council's decision is final.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
NONCONFORMITIES AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 156.70 NONCONFORMING AND ABANDONED SIGNS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   No sign shall be erected, reconstructed, or repaired after the
effective date of this chapter unless at least one of the following conditions
is satisfied:
         (a)   The erection, reconstruction, or repair meets all the provisions
of this chapter or any other applicable ordinance adopted by the city;
         (b)   An existing sign has rights of nonconformance;
         (c)   The work on a sign can be classified as ordinary maintenance; or
         (d)   Repairs are necessary to prevent a hazardous condition, as
determined by the Building Official or third-party engineer's certification.
Those repairs include major structural repair which affects the structural
integrity of the sign and constitutes a hazard to the public health, safety, or
welfare.
   (B)   Unlawful, discontinued, or abandoned signs. Unlawful, discontinued, or
abandoned signs are subject to the following:
      (1)   Notice and order. Any sign, abandoned sign, supporting structure,
or abandoned supporting structure which is erected, placed, relocated,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, displayed, maintained, installed,
modified, or used in violation of this chapter may be removed by the Director
as provided in this section. The Director shall deliver or send a written
notice and order to the owner of an unlawful, discontinued, or abandoned sign
or the owner of the premises where the unlawful sign is located. A notice and
order sent or delivered to the person listed by the district appraisal roll as
the owner of the premises where the unlawful, discontinued, or abandoned sign
is located shall be presumed to be sufficient. The notice and order shall:
         (a)   Describe the nature of the violation or the conditions that
substantiate abandonment with specific citation to relevant law;
         (b)   Order the correction of the violation or conditions that
substantiate abandonment within a time specified, which shall not be less than
30 business days from the mailing of the notice; and
         (c)   Give notice that the Director may remove and impound the
unlawful or discontinued or abandoned sign at the owner's expense if the
violation is not corrected within the time specified.
      (2)   Removal appeals.
         (a)   If the person ordered to correct a violation fails to do so
within the time specified, the Director may remove, or cause the removal of,
the unlawful or abandoned sign.
         (b)   Any person aggrieved by the order may file an appeal with the
City Council in which case the sign may remain in place until the Council
reaches its decision, unless the sign presents a threat to the public safety by
virtue of its physical condition.
      (3)   Impoundment, redemption, and disposal. The following applies to the
impoundment, redemption, or disposal of an unlawful or abandoned sign:
         (a)   Any sign which is removed by the Director pursuant to this
chapter shall be impounded, transported to, and stored by the Director at a
location designated for such purpose. Records shall be kept of the storage
location for that sign. The Director shall send a letter to the owner of that
sign, if known, or, if not known, to the owner or person in control of the
premises where the sign was located, giving notice of impoundment.
         (b)   The Director shall hold the sign in storage for at least 45
calendar days after notice of impoundment has been mailed. The city may recover
reasonable costs for hauling and storing the sign. Any portable sign may be
redeemed by the owner upon the payment of a fee to the city for hauling the
sign to storage, plus a per day storage fee. Any non-portable sign may be
redeemed by the owner upon payment of the cost of removal and hauling the sign
to storage, as determined by the Director, plus a per day storage fee. These
fees shall be established by the City Council.
         (c)   Any sign not reclaimed by the owner within 30 calendar days of
the mailing of the notice of impoundment may be disposed of in accordance with
applicable law.
      (4)   Recovery costs. If, upon disposal of an unredeemed non-portable
sign, the Director has not received an amount sufficient to cover the cost of
removal and hauling of the removed sign, the Director may send notice to the
owner of the premises where the sign was located, stating payment of the
removal and hauling costs, and any amount received in disposal of that sign.
Any remaining unpaid costs 30 calendar days from the date of mailing of notice
shall become delinquent and shall bear interest at 10% per annum. The cost
levied against the premises shall include an administration fee established by
the City Council.
      (5)   Appeal. Any person may contest the reasonableness of the cost of
removal of a sign imposed by filing of an appeal with the Director (for
consideration by the City Council) within 20 calendar days of the mailing of
the notice of the costs. The City Council may uphold the costs imposed by the
Director or impose and levee whatever costs the City Council considers
reasonable.
      (6)   Removal of hazardous signs.
         (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the
Director may remove any unlawful sign which, because of its location or
condition, clearly constitutes an immediate hazard or danger to the public.
         (b)   The Director must receive a written response from the Building
Official determining that the sign is hazardous or dangerous.
         (c)   The Building Official shall determine that the sign is hazardous
or dangerous by assessing if the sign or any sign component:
            1.   Is not securely attached;
            2.   Is torn, broken, damaged, hanging, or leaning more than 10%;
            3.   Displays unsecured wires or exposed lighting fixtures; or
            4.   Creates a similar effect that may constitute as a public
nuisance.
         (d)   Before removing the sign, the Director shall make a reasonable
attempt to locate the owner of the hazardous sign or person responsible for its
display, placement, or maintenance to give written notice of the violation, the
action necessary to correct the violation and time period in which the
correction must be made.
         (e)   The notice shall be delivered to the owner of the sign, the
owner of the premises, or the person responsible for the sign's display,
placement, or maintenance, if located; otherwise, the notice shall be affixed
to the sign or other prominent place on the premises likely to come to the
attention of the owner of the sign or premises.
         (f)   If no corrective action is taken within the time specified, the
city, upon a determination by City Council, may pursue injunctive action to
have the sign removed.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.71 ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Director shall administer this chapter. The Director may delegate
duties and powers granted to and imposed upon the Director by this chapter.
   (B)   The Director is authorized to:
      (1)   Request additional submittal materials deemed necessary to
determine compliance;
      (2)   Inspect any sign, building, structure, or land to determine whether
any violations of this chapter exist;
      (3)   Approve or deny a permit in accordance with this chapter;
      (4)   Issue a notice of violation if a sign is constructed or being
constructed and does not comply with the requirements of this chapter; or
      (5)   Issue a notice of fine if the violation continues or is not
remedied within 14 calendar days of the receipt of a notice of violation.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
DEFINITIONS
§ 156.80 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Usage and interpretation rules. For the purpose of this chapter,
certain terms or words are interpreted or defined as follows:
      (1)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense;
      (2)   The singular includes the plural;
      (3)   The word PERSON includes a corporation, trust, individual, or group
of individuals;
      (4)   The term SHALL is always mandatory; and
      (5)   The term MAY is discretionary.
      (6)   A reference to a city official includes a designee of that
official.
      (7)   When the calculation of a number for a required standard result in
a fraction, that fraction is rounded up to the next whole number.
   (B)   Words and terms not expressly defined. Words and terms not expressly
defined in this chapter are to be construed according to the normally accepted
meaning of those words or terms. Where no definition appears for a term in this
chapter, then use the term's customary usage or definition in the practice of
planning, engineering, or building construction, as determined by the Director.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.81 STANDARD DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   ABANDONMENT. To cease or discontinue a use or activity other than short-term
interruptions to a use or activity during periods of remodeling, maintaining,
or otherwise improving or rearranging a facility, or during normal periods of
vacation or seasonal closure.
   ABUTTING. Adjacent, adjoining, and contiguous to. It may also mean having a
lot line in common with a right-of-way or easement, or with a physical
improvement such as a street, waterline, park, or open space.
   ADOPTED BUILDING CODE. The city's adopted building code, as amended.
   ALLEY. A public right-of-way, not intended to provide the primary means of
access to abutting lots, that is used primarily for vehicular service access to
the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
   ALTER. To change the size, shape or outline, or type of sign.
   APPLICANT. The person or entity responsible for the submission of an
application. The applicant must be the actual owner of the property for which
an application is submitted, or a duly authorized representative of the
property owner.
   APPLICATION. The package of materials, including but not limited to an
application form, completed checklist, tax certificate, drawings or studies,
and other informational materials, that is required by the city to initiate
city review and approval of a development project.
   APPROVAL. Approval constitutes a determination by the Director or City
Council responsible for such determination that the application is in
compliance with the minimum provisions of this chapter.
   ARTERIAL.
      (1)   A street designated within the Master Thoroughfare Plan.
      (2)   A principal traffic way more or less continuous across the city or
areas adjacent thereto, intended primarily to provide for the movement of
through traffic, and that shall act as a principal connecting street with
highways as indicated in the Master Throughfare Plan.
   ATTACHED AWNING. An architectural projection from an exterior wall of a
building that provides weather protection, identity, or decoration, and is
partially or wholly supported by the building to which it is attached. An
awning is comprised of a lightweight frame structure over which a covering is
attached.
   ATTACHED CANOPY. An architectural projection from an exterior wall of a
building that is of rigid construction, is supported by attachment to a
building on one or more sides, and over which a covering is attached that
provides weather protection, identity, or decoration.
   BLINK. A light or light source that shines intermittently or unsteadily.
   BUILDING. Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, personal property, records or other movable property and when
separated in a manner sufficient to prevent fire, each portion of such building
shall be deemed a separate building.
   BUILDING FACADE.
      (1)   PRIMARY FACADE. A façade that faces a public or private street or
street right-of-way, park, courtyard, or trail.
      (2)   SECONDARY FACADE. A façade that does not face a public or private
street or street right of way, park, courtyard, or trail.
      (3)   FRONT FACADE. The façade that contains a primary public entrance to
a building.
   CHANGEABLE COPY. A copy that can be changed or rearranged without altering
the sign face or structure, excluding electronic message centers.
   CITY. The City of Cleburne, Texas, together with all its governing and
operating bodies.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the city.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the city or their designee.
   COLLECTOR. A street that is continuous through several residential districts
and is intended as a connecting street between residential districts and
nonresidential districts, highways, or business districts, and that may serve
both through-traffic and local access functions.
   COPY. Logos, characters, symbols, or any other portion of a sign that
conveys a message or information.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, paving, drainage,
utilities, storage, and agricultural activities.
   DIRECTOR. The person designated by the City Manager to provide oversight for
and have responsibility of the city's planning and development related duties.
This term shall also include any designee of the Director, including the
Building Official.
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner of the use of land by the public, a
corporation, entity, or persons for specific purposes.
   EFFECTIVE DATE. The date this Sign Code or any subsequent amendment becomes
effective.
   ENGINEER. Per § 1001.002 of the State of Tex. Occupations Code, as may be
amended, ENGINEER means a person licensed to engage in the practice of
engineering in the State of Texas.
   ERECT. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and shall
also include:
      (1)   The painting of signs on the exterior surface of a building or
structure;
      (2)   The painting or affixing of signs to the exterior or interior
surface of windows; and
      (3)   Outdoor signs and signs located interior to a building but readily
visible from abutting property or right of way, unless the sign is located five
feet or more from a window or doorway.
   EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION. Illumination provided by an external light source
such as a lamp, bulb, or the like.
   FLASH or FLASHING. A light or light source that shines in a bright and
brief, sudden, or intermittent way.
   FLICKER. A light or light source that shines unsteadily and varies rapidly
in brightness.
   FRONTAGE. All the property abutting on one side of the street, or between
two intersecting streets, measured along the street line.
   GROUNDED CANOPY. A permanent structure that is structurally independent of a
building affixed to the ground, that is of rigid construction, and over which a
covering is attached that provides weather protection, identity, or decoration.
   IMPROVEMENT. Any man-made fixed item that becomes part of or placed upon
real property.
   INTERNAL ILLUMINATION. Illumination created by a light source internal to
the sign, transparent or translucent material from a light source within the
sign structure or panel, or exposed lighting located on the same plane as the
sign face.
   LOT. Land occupied, or to be occupied, by a building and its accessory
buildings and including such open spaces as are required under this chapter and
having its principal frontage on a public street or officially approved place.
   MARQUEE. A type of attached canopy that has a top surface that is typically
sloped less than 25 degrees from the horizontal, is located less than ten feet
above the top of an operable exterior doorway, and frequently includes panels
for changeable copy.
   NEON. A source of light supplied by a glass tube that is filled with neon
gas, argon, mercury, or other inert gas that produces ultraviolet light, and
bent to form letters, symbols, or other shapes. The term NEON is inclusive of
flexible light emitting diode (LED) technology that simulates neon. Generally,
neon includes:
      (1)   All tubular light sources that employ a charged gas to illuminate a
tube that glows;
      (2)   Similar gas-activated tubular light systems that emit colors; and
      (3)   Other tubular light sources (including fiber optics) that are used
to form letters and shapes.
   NONCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL. Any material that will not ignite at or below a
temperature of 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit (649 degrees Celsius) and will not
continue to burn or glow at that temperature or shall have a flame spread of 25
or less.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. The building that contains the primary function or
activity on a lot.
   PROPERTY LINES. The lines bounding a lot.
   PULSE/PULSATE. A single vibration or short burst of light.
   RESIDENTIAL AREA. Those areas where residential uses are the primary uses in
a residential zoning district.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY.
      (1)   A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street or
alley or other transportation infrastructure.
      (2)   A right-of-way may be used for other facilities and utilities, such
as sidewalks, railroad crossings, electrical communication, oil or gas, water
or sanitary or storm sewer facilities, or for any other use.
      (3)   The use of right-of-way shall also include parkways and medians
outside of pavement.
   ROOF. The external upper covering of a building, including the frame for
supporting the roofing.
   ROOF LINE. The height that is defined by the intersection of the roof of the
building and the wall of the building.
   SETBACK. A line within a lot, parallel to and measured from a corresponding
lot line, establishing the minimum required yard and governing the placement of
structures and uses on the lot.
   SIGHT VISIBILITY TRIANGLE. A space left open and unobstructed by fences,
structures, shrubs, trees, or other plant life along streets at the corner in
front of the building line of lots contiguous to intersecting streets. Also
called INTERSECTION SIGHT TRIANGLE.
   SIGN CODE. The adopted sign regulations of the city, as may be amended in
the future, and may be referred as "the Sign Code".
   SIGN HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the highest point of a sign
to the ground or lowest grade beneath the sign.
   SIGN PERMIT. A permit authorizing the erection or maintenance of a sign
pursuant to this chapter.
   SIGN PROJECTION. The measured horizontal distance from the building wall to
the sign's outermost edge.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any combination of materials to form a construction for the
purpose of attaching, fixing, or otherwise supporting a sign, whether installed
on, above, or below the surface of the lot, a building, or any other solid
surface.
   SITE PLAN. A detailed, scaled drawing of all surface improvements,
structures, and utilities proposed for development and is associated with the
Zoning Ordinance.
   STOREFRONT. The facade or entryway of a store, shop, or business located
within a building. A building may have multiple storefronts which may be
located on any level of that building.
   STORY. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a
floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above. Also, the vertical
distance between two successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces and,
for the topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the
ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the roof
rafters.
   STREET. A public right-of-way that provides vehicular traffic access to
adjacent lands or for the movement of through traffic.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected that requires location on the
ground or attached to something having a location on the ground, including, but
not limited to freestanding canopies, pergolas, gazebos, carports, advertising
signs, billboards, and poster panels, but not including fences, retaining
walls, sidewalks, or curbs. For structures designed for habitation, see
BUILDING.
   SUBDIVISION.
      (1)   The division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more parts or
lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building
development or transfer of ownership with the exception of transfer to heirs of
an estate, and shall include re-subdivision.
      (2)   Any other subdivision or re-subdivision of land contemplated by the
provisions of Chapter 212, Tex. Local Gov’t Code.
   WALL AREA. The entire facade of a building where a wall sign is placed,
excluding all windows and doors of the facade.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. The adopted Zoning Ordinance of the city, as may be
amended in the future, and may be referred as "the Zoning Ordinance."
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.82 SIGN DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   ATTACHED AWNING/CANOPY SIGN. A sign painted, printed, attached, or otherwise
applied to any facet of the covering or frame structure of an awning or
attached structural canopy.
   ATTACHED BANNER. A temporary sign made of fabric, cloth, bunting, plastic,
paper, or any other non-rigid material with no enclosing framework that is
attached, mounted, tied, or otherwise placed on a building or pole attached to
a building. This definition does not include flags, pennants, or streamers.
   ATTACHED SIGN. Those signs that are affixed to a building or structure that
are established in § 156.37.
   DETACHED BANNER. A temporary, freestanding sign made of fabric, cloth,
bunting, plastic, paper, or any other non-rigid material with no enclosing
framework that affixes to the ground. This definition does not include flags,
pennants, or streamers.
   DETACHED SIGN. Those signs that are freestanding on a lot that are
established in § 156.36.
   DIGITAL BILLBOARD. A freestanding sign or sign structure upon which an
electronic copy is placed on a poster or panel and mounted on a pole or metal
structure typically with a monopole structure constructed with tubular steel
support, tubular steel framing, and a single display panel with a concrete
foundation.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER (EMC). A sign that displays a digital copy,
including any illuminated sign on which the illumination is not kept stationary
or constant in intensity and color when the sign is in use, including any light
emitting diode (LED) or digital panel, and which varies in color or intensity.
Electronic message centers are also referred to as digital signs, dynamic
signs, or changeable electronic variable message signs (CEVMS).
   FEATHER SIGN. A temporary, freestanding sign made of flexible material in
the shape of a feather, quill, sail, blade, or teardrop, and mounted on a solid
or flexible pole or cord that affixes to the ground.
   FLAG. A piece of fabric or other flexible material with distinctive colors
and patterns, customarily mounted on a pole or similar freestanding structure
or on a pole mounted on a building.
   GENERAL INCIDENTAL SIGN. A small permanent sign that is freestanding or
attached to a building that is in addition to the primary sign types for the
property, such as detached signs and attached signs, and that has a height and
scale that is clearly subordinate to the primary sign types allowed for the
property. Examples of typical general incidental signs include house numbers,
occupant directories, property or tenant identification names or numbers,
wayfinding signs, and directional signs, and signs warning the public against
trespassing or danger from animals. The list of examples is not exhaustive and
is provided to clarify the regulations and does not limit the content of
general incidental signs. The city will not review the content of general
incidental signs.
   GENERAL TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric,
cardboard, wood, wallboard, metal, or other light materials, with or without
frames, which is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time only.
Examples of typical general temporary signs include political signs, public
demonstrations, grand opening signs, contractor signs (includes all licensed
trades such as roofing, plumbing, electrical work, etc.), real estate signs,
garage sale signs, and signs that announce an event such as a carnival, circus,
or similar event. The list of examples is not exhaustive and is provided to
clarify the regulations and does not limit the content of general temporary
signs. The city will not review the content of general temporary signs.
   GROUNDED CANOPY SIGN. A permanent attached sign that is affixed to a
grounded canopy.
   HANGING SIGN. A sign suspended from the underside of a canopy, awning,
ceiling, marquee, roof overhang, a covered porch, or walkway.
   INFLATABLE DEVICE. A type of balloon sign that is a cold air inflated
object, which may be of various shapes, made of flexible fabric, resting on the
ground or structure, and equipped with a portable blower motor that provides a
constant flow of air into the device. Inflatable devices are restrained,
attached, or held in place by a cord, rope, cable, or similar method.
   LED. The abbreviation for Light Emitting Diode.
   MAJOR MONUMENT SIGN. A permanent detached multi-tenant sign with a low
profile, a base, and a support structure with a solid appearance that is at
least 75% of the width of the widest part of the sign's face.
   MAJOR POLE SIGN. A permanent detached multi-tenant sign in which the sign
face is mounted on one or more poles and the base of the sign face is situated
more than 12 inches above the ground. A major pole sign does not include a flag
mounted on a flagpole.
   MARQUEE SIGN. A permanent attached sign affixed to a marquee.
   MINOR MONUMENT SIGN. A permanent detached single-tenant sign with a low
profile, a base, and a support structure with a solid appearance that is at
least 75% of the width of the widest part of the sign's face.
   MINOR POLE SIGN. A permanent detached single-tenant sign in which the sign
face is mounted on one or more poles and the base of the sign face is situated
more than 12 inches above the ground. A minor pole sign does not include a flag
mounted on a flagpole.
   MURAL. A hand-produced work in which paint is applied by hand directly on an
exterior wall of a building or structure. A mural does not include:
      (1)   Mechanically produced or computer-generated prints or images,
including digitally printed vinyl sheets and wraps;
      (2)   Works containing electrical or mechanical components; or
      (3)   Works that involve changing or moving images or components.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign that was lawfully in existence and was properly
permitted by the city, to the extent such permitting was required as of the
effective date of this chapter.
   PROJECTING SIGN. A permanent attached sign type that is affixed to and
projects 18 inches or more from the wall of a building and is generally
perpendicular to the building façade. A projecting sign does not include signs
located on an attached canopy, awning, marquee, or roof.
   REAL ESTATE AND HOME BUILDING SIGN. A temporary sign made of a wood or light
metal frame that is affixed to land that is for sale or is in the process of
development. Real estate signs are usually distinguished from permanent signage
by a lack of features such as engineered footings, structural reinforcement,
electrification, and permanent applied finishes and/or materials.
   SIDEWALK SIGN. A temporary and portable sign that is ordinarily in the shape
of an "A" or inverted "T" with back-to-back sign faces, an easel, or a similar
configuration to be located on a sidewalk or walkway.
   SIGN. A visual display of an object or device that includes elements such as
colors, lights, motion, symbols, images, icons, letters, numerals, figures,
characters, or combines any of those elements, that is intended to communicate,
advertise, identify, announce, direct, inform, or attract. The term SIGN
includes a structure used to support or display a sign.
   SIGN AREA. The area enclosed by the smallest imaginary regular shape (e.g.
parallelogram, triangle, circle, trapezoid) or combination of regular shapes
that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem,
or other display, or combination thereof, together with any material or color
forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from
the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. Sign area includes such
features as decorative or ornamental elements or features, borders, trims, but
not including the architectural enclosure or supporting structure which is used
solely for support of the sign, such as poles, columns and cables, pylons, or
other architectural enclosures.
   SUBDIVISION ENTRY SIGN. A specific detached sign, either in the form of a
minor monument sign or double poled/columned sign, located at the entry of a
residential subdivision from a local, collector, or arterial street.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. Those signs that are either freestanding on a lot or affixed
to a building or structure which are erected on a specified time period.
Temporary signs include all those signs established in § 156.39.
   WALL SIGN. A permanent attached sign (other than an incidental sign) that is
affixed on an exterior building wall, and projects less than 18 inches from the
wall to which it is attached (this projection includes letters).
   WINDOW SIGN. A sign posted, printed, placed, or affixed to a window or glass
door. A window sign includes any sign that is located inside a building, that
is three feet or less from a window or glass door, and that is intended to be
visible from outside the building.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
§ 156.99 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter constitutes
a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   The Director may institute any appropriate action proceedings to
prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, relocation,
alteration, repair, or use of any sign, and to restrain, correct, or abate such
violation. Penalties for violation are as follows:
      (1)   Violators of any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
fines established in this section. Signs may be removed by agent and employees
of the city and may be either stored or destroyed without liability to the city
or its agents, or employees. The owner of a sign confiscated by the city may
claim the sign in the custody of the city for an administrative fee of $200 per
sign;
      (2)   Fines shall be assessed to those who violate §
130.03 and §
130.04 of the Cleburne Code of Ordinances; and
      (3)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
other penalty is established is subject to the penalties established in §
10.99 of the Cleburne Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 06-2025-20, passed 6-10-25)
CHAPTER 157: MANAGEMENT OF THE RIGHT-OF-WAY
Section
   
157.01   Purpose
   
157.02   Definitions
   
157.03   Authority; enforcement; offenses
   
157.04   Registration requirements
   
157.05   Construction permit requirements
   
157.06   Permit denial, revocation and appeal
   
157.07   Variance
   
157.08   Construction requirements
   
157.09   Improperly constructed facilities
   
157.10   Restoration and maintenance period
   
157.11   Emergency repairs in the public right-of-way
   
157.12   Public improvement coordination
   
157.13   Utility structures; permit
   
157.14   Indemnity
   
157.15   Effective date
   
157.16   Network notes in public right-of-way
   
157.17   Right-of-way, alley, and easement abandonment
 
   
157.99   Penalty
§ 157.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public during the
installation, operation, and maintenance of facilities by public service
providers;
   (B)   Govern and monitor the orderly use of the public right-of-way;
   (C)   Provide for the registration of public service providers with
facilities in the public right-of-way;
   (D)   Provide insurance requirements for construction in the public right-
of-way;
   (E)   Provide permit requirements and procedures for construction in the
public right-of-way;
   (F)   Provide for maintenance and repair of the public right-of-way and of
facilities located in the public right-of-way;
   (G)   Provide for emergency activities in the public right-of-way;
   (H)   Provide for coordination with public improvements;
   (I)   Regulate the installation of utility structures;
   (J)   Provide an effective date;
   (K)   Provide for enforcement; and
   (L)   Provide a penalty for violation of any provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 06-2006-46, passed 6-13-06)
§ 157.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY.  The City of Cleburne and the city's officers and employees.
   CONFORM.  To remove, alter, change, relocate, or adapt the underground or
overhead facilities of a public service provider in the public right-of-way in
advance of proposed public improvements financed by the city.
   CONSTRUCTION. Any of the following activities performed by any person within
a public right-of-way:
      (1)   Installation, excavation, laying, placement, repair, upgrade,
maintenance, or relocation of facilities or other improvements, whether
temporary or permanent;
      (2)   Modification or alteration to any surface, subsurface, or aerial
space within the public right-of-way;
      (3)   Performance, restoration, or repair of pavement cuts or
excavations; or
      (4)   Other similar construction work.
   DIRECTOR.    The City of Cleburne's Development Services Director or any
designated representative.
   EMERGENCY SITUATION.  Circumstances requiring immediate construction or
operations by a public service provider to:
      (1)   Prevent imminent damage or injury to the health or safety of any
person or to the public right-of-way;
      (2)   Restore service; or
      (3)   Prevent the immediate loss of service.
   EXCAVATION.  The removal of dirt, fill, or other material in the public
right-of-way including, but not limited to, the methods of open trenching,
boring, tunneling, or jacking.
   FACILITIES. Includes, but is not limited to, the plant, equipment,
buildings, structures, poles, wires, cables, lines, conduit, mains, pipes,
vaults, and appurtenances of a public service provider or the city located
within the public right-of-way and includes property owned, operated, leased,
licensed, used, controlled, or supplied for, by, or in connection with the
business of the public service provider or the city.
   PAVEMENT CUT.  A cut made into the paved surface, including a sidewalk, of
the public right-of-way.
   PERMITTEE.  The person applying for or receiving a permit to perform
construction within the city's right-of-way under the terms and conditions of
this chapter. The term includes any officer, director, partner, manager,
superintendent, or other authorized person exercising control over or on behalf
of the public service provider.
   PERSON.  A natural person, a corporation, a public service provider or its
representative, a permittee, a governmental entity or agency (excluding the
city or the city's contractor), a limited liability company, a joint venture, a
business trust, an estate, a trust, a partnership, an association, or any other
legal entity.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The area of land within the city on, below, or above a
public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or public utility
easement. The term does not include airwaves above the public right-of-way that
fall under the exclusive jurisdiction of the United States government.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITTING AND CONSTRUCTION MANUAL. The Manual, as
adopted and amended from time to time, published by the City of Cleburne that
contains engineering, technical, and other special criteria and standards
established by the Director for permitting and construction within the public
right-of-way.
   PUBLIC SERVICE PROVIDER.  Any energy delivery or transport company,
telecommunications company, cable company, gas company, water utility, storm
water utility, wastewater utility, or other utility. The City of Cleburne, or
any person working under contract with the city, is not included in this
definition.
   SPOILS OR EXCAVATED MATERIAL.  Construction waste, construction supplies, or
excavated dirt, fill, or other similar material that is stored or placed upon
the surface of a public right-of-way.
   UTILITY STRUCTURE.  Any above or below ground manhole, hand hole, vault,
cabinet, or any other appurtenance other than a pole or device attached to a
pole which is owned or used by a public service provider. The phrase does not
include fire hydrants, devices or structures used to control or direct
pedestrian or vehicular traffic on an adjacent roadway.
(Ord. 06-2006-46, passed 6-13-06; Am. Ord. 11-2007-61, passed 11-13-07)
§ 157.03 AUTHORITY; ENFORCEMENT; OFFENSES.
   (A)   Authority.
      (1)   The Director is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions
of this chapter, and to promulgate regulations including, but not limited to,
engineering, technical, and other special criteria and standards.
      (2)   The Director is authorized to enter a construction site for which a
permit is granted under this chapter for purposes of inspection to determine
compliance with the permit and this chapter.
      (3)   The Director is authorized to request from the public service
provider plans of record that show all of its facilities existing in the public
right-of-way that may impact existing or proposed city facilities, including
infrastructure, or another service provider's existing or proposed facilities.
The public service provider shall provide to the Director plans of record
within 90 days of the request, or in accordance with an alternate schedule as
agreed to by both parties, to the extent such records are available. Public
release of such records shall be in accordance with the Public Information Act,
Tex. Government Code, Chapter 552.
      (4)   If the release of the location of any utility, including water and
sewer, or of plans of record submitted under this section would jeopardize
public safety, the information shall be considered confidential. In addition,
if plans of record submitted under this section include information expressly
designated by the public service provider as a trade secret or other
confidential information protected from disclosure by state law, the Director
may not disclose that information to the public without the consent of the
public service provider, unless otherwise compelled by an opinion of the
attorney general pursuant to the Texas Public Information Act, as amended, or
by a court having jurisdiction of the matter pursuant to applicable law. This
section may not be construed to authorize a public service provider to
designate all matters in its plans of record as confidential or as trade
secrets.
   (B)   Enforcement and offenses.
      (1)   A person commits an offense if the person:
         (a)   Performs, authorizes, directs, or supervises construction
without a valid permit issued under this chapter;
         (b)   Fails to comply with restrictions or requirements of a permit
issued under this chapter;
         (c)   Fails to comply with a lawful order or regulation of the
Director issued pursuant to this chapter; or
         (d)   Violates any other provision of this chapter.
      (2)   A person commits an offense if, in connection with the performance
of construction in the public right-of-way, the person:
         (a)   Damages the public right-of-way beyond what is incidental or
necessary to the performance of the construction;
         (b)   Damages public or private facilities within the public right-of-
way;
         (c)   Fails to clear debris associated with the construction in a
timely manner from a public right-of-way after construction is completed;
         (d)   Fails to immediately clear debris which results from
construction and which creates a safety hazard in a public right-of-way; or
         (e)   Fails to stabilize any disturbed area from erosion within 14
days after construction is completed, unless an alternative time frame is
approved by the Director.
      (3)   It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this chapter that
the person or public service provider has a franchise, license, interlocal or
other agreement with the city which provides the provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to the public service provider.
      (4)   A culpable mental state is not required to prove an offense under
this chapter. A person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of
a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation
is committed, continued, authorized or directed. An offense under division (B)
(2)(c) or (d) above is punishable by a fine of not less than $500 or more than
$2,000. Any other offense under this chapter is punishable by a fine of $500.
      (5)   This chapter may be enforced by a civil court action in accordance
with state or federal law, in addition to any other remedies, civil or
criminal, the city has for a violation of this chapter.
      (6)   Prior to initiation of civil enforcement litigation, the permittee,
or any other person who has violated a provision of this chapter, shall be
given the opportunity to correct the violation within a time frame specified by
the Director. This division does not prohibit the Director or the city from
taking enforcement action as to past or present violations of this chapter,
notwithstanding their correction.
      (7)   If a permittee is a contractor of the public service provider and
has been convicted of an offense under this chapter, no additional permits will
be granted to the contractor until the offense has been corrected and any
direct or indirect costs incurred by the city have been reimbursed. No
additional permits shall be granted to the contractor for a period of one year
from the date of the conviction.
      (8)   If a public service provider utilizes its own employees to perform
permitted work, and the provider's employee is convicted of an offense under
this chapter, no additional permits shall be issued to the service provider
until the offense has been corrected and any costs incurred by the city have
been reimbursed. This provision shall not prohibit a public service provider
from performing work in an emergency situation.
      (9)   In the event the person or public service provider believes it
should not be held responsible for costs assessed pursuant to divisions (7) or
(8) above, the person or provider may file a request for a refund within 60
days of payment of the costs. The request shall be submitted to the Director
and shall include documentation and evidence to support the request for a
refund. The Director shall conduct a hearing at which the applicant may present
evidence. The Director shall render a decision as to whether the refund should
be granted, based upon the preponderance of evidence presented. The public
service provider shall have the right to appeal the decision of the Development
Services Director to District Court within 60 days of the decision of the
Development Services Director.
(Ord. 06-2006-46, passed 6-13-06; Am. Ord. 11-2007-61, passed 11-13-07)
§ 157.04 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Registration. A public service provider with existing facilities
within the public right-of-way must register with the city within 60 days of
the effective date of this chapter. Any public service provider who does not
have existing facilities within the public right-of-way and who wishes to
install new facilities must first register with the city. Registration shall be
in accordance with the following requirements:
      (1)   Prior to registration, a public service provider must be either a
certificated telecommunications provider under Tex. Local Gov't Code Chapter
283, have a certificate of convenience and necessity under Tex. Water Code
Chapter 13, have a franchise, interlocal or license agreement with the city or
be authorized by state statute to operate facilities within the public right-
of-way. Registration shall otherwise be denied.
      (2)   The registration must be on a form furnished by the Director and
made in the name of the public service provider that owns the facilities. The
form must be filled out completely and accurately. Any omissions or
inaccuracies on the form may be cause for denial of the registration at the
city's discretion.
      (3)   If information provided as part of the registration changes, the
public service provider must inform the Director in writing not more than 30
days after the date the change occurs.
      (4)   The public service provider shall include the following with the
registration:
         (a)   The name of the public service provider using the public right-
of-way, including any business name, assumed name, or trade name the public
service provider operates under, or has operated under within the past five
years.
         (b)   If the public service provider is a certificated
telecommunications provider, a copy of the certification issued by the Texas
Public Utilities Commission to provide local exchange telephone service.
         (c)   A copy of any franchise, agreement or license issued by the City
of Cleburne or statute authorizing the public service provider to use the
public right-of-way.
         (d)   The name and mailing address of the officer or agent designated
as the person authorized to receive service of process on behalf of the public
service provider.
      (5)   The public service provider must provide proof of insurance and
appropriate bonds. The requirements for insurance and bonds are provided in
divisions (B) and (C) below.
   (B)   Insurance requirements.
      (1)   A public service provider shall obtain and maintain insurance
throughout the time it has facilities in public rights-of-way. The city
reserves the right to review the insurance requirements, and
to reasonably adjust insurance coverage and limits when the City Attorney
determines that changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims
history of the industry or the public service provider require adjustment of
the coverage. Insurance policies shall meet the following minimum requirements:
Workers' Compensation and Employer's Liability Insurance
Workers' Compensation               Statutory Limit
Employer's Liability                  $100,000 Each Accident
                        $100,000 Disease – Each Employee
                        $500,000 Disease – Policy Limit
      (Employer's Liability not required if policy limit is greater than
$10,000,000)
Liability Insurance
Commercial General Liability            $1,000,000 Per Occurrence
(No standard coverages are to be excluded by endorsement) The policy shall
provide blanket contractual liability insurance for all written contracts and
shall include coverage for products and completed operations liability,
independent contractor's liability; coverage for property damage from perils of
explosion, collapse or damage to underground utilities, commonly known as XCU
coverage.
Automobile Liability Insurance
Commercial Auto Liability Policy            $500,000 Combined Single Limit
   (including coverage for owned, hired, and non-owned autos)
Umbrella Liability
(Following Form and Drop Down Provisions Included)   $5,000,000 Each Occurrence
      (2)   In addition to the above requirements, the insurance required under
this section shall:
         (a)   Be written with the City of Cleburne as an additional insured,
except on worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance, using an
endorsement Form GC 20 26 or broader;
         (b)   Provide for 30 days notice of cancellation to the city, for
nonpayment of premium, material change, or any other cause;
         (c)   Be written through companies duly authorized to transact that
class of insurance in the State of Texas. Insurance is to be placed with
insurers with a Best Rating of no less than A-:VII;
         (d)   Waive subrogation rights for loss or damage so that insurers
have no right to recovery or subrogation against the City of Cleburne, it being
the intention that the required insurance policies shall protect the city, its
officers, and employees and be primary coverage for all losses covered by the
policies; and
         (e)   Provide that notice of claims shall be provided to the Director
by certified mail.
      (3)   The policy clause "Other Insurance" shall not apply to the city if
the city is an additional insured under the policy.
      (4)   For purposes of this section, the city will accept a self-insurance
program of the public service provider if the approved in advance by the city
and:
         (a)   Provides the equivalent coverage as required herein if the
public service provider demonstrates by written information that it has
adequate financial resources to be a self-insured entity as reasonably
determined by the city; or
         (b)   In the case of a cable service provider who holds a state-issued
certificate of authority and is self-insured under the provisions of state law,
such self-insurance program provides the same defense and claims processing as
required by this section.
      (5)   A certificate of insurance providing proof of coverage shall be
provided to the Director with the registration form.
      (6)   If a public service provider is subject to statutory limitations
for damages resulting from liability less than the minimum coverages provided
in division (B)(1) above, the public service provider shall not be required to
provide proof of insurance coverages in excess of the statutory requirements.
   (C)   Bonding requirements.
      (1)   Each year, not later than February 1, a public service provider
shall, without cost to the city, provide a maintenance bond for the
construction work anticipated to be performed in the public rights-of-way in
the upcoming year. The maintenance bond shall guarantee the work for two years
from the date of its completion and shall be in the amount of 100% of the cost
of the construction work, including the cost of the restoration of the public
right-of-way, to be performed in the upcoming year. Each bond shall be executed
by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Texas and
acceptable to the city. At the option of the service provider, maintenance
bonds may be provided for each project.
      (2)   A public service provider that has assets in excess of $20,000,000
may annually submit a written request for a waiver from the bonding
requirements. The request for a waiver shall be filed not later than the
November 1 before the calendar year for which the waiver is sought.
         (a)   The request shall set forth in detail the basis for the request
including but not
limited to:
            1.   The public service provider's performance history in the city;
            2.   Documentation, in a form acceptable to the city, that
demonstrates that the public service provider has assets in excess of
$20,000,000; and
            3.   Documentation, in a form acceptable to the city, that
demonstrates that the public service provider has assets or reserves sufficient
to cover the amount of the bonds.
         (b)   Within 30 business days of receipt of a written request for a
waiver, the Director, with good cause, may grant a waiver to the bonding
requirements. In making this decision, the Director shall take into account,
among other things:
            1.   The public service provider's record of performance in the
city's
rights-of-way;
            2.   The public service provider's record of compliance with this
chapter;
            3.   A showing of financial responsibility by the public service
provider to complete the proposed project, and;
            4.   Any other factors deemed relevant to management of the city's
rights-of-way.
      (3)   A bond may not be required from a cable service provider for any
work consisting of aerial construction except that a bond as provided for
herein may be required of a provider that cannot demonstrate a record of at
least four years' performance of work in any municipal public right-of-way free
of currently unsatisfied claims by a municipality for damage to the right-of-
way.
   (D)   The requirements for insurance may be satisfied by public service
providers with a current franchise or license or other agreement if their
current franchise or license adequately provides for insurance coverage which
will afford equivalent protection for the city. The requirements for bonds may
be satisfied by public service providers with a current franchise, interlocal
or license agreement if the agreement adequately provides for bonds.
   (E)   After registration has been completed, a separate construction permit
for each work location must be obtained from the city's Engineering Department.
Nothing in this section relieves a public service provider from obtaining a
construction permit under this chapter to perform work in the public right-of-
way, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 06-2006-46, passed 6-13-06)
Penalty, see § 157.99
§ 157.05 CONSTRUCTION PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person performs any construction
within a public right-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit from
the Engineering Department prior to the start of construction. A person who
undertakes any work outside of the public right-of-way that will cut, break, or
otherwise damage the public right-of-way shall also obtain a construction
permit. Any crossing of public right-of-way either by open cut or boring shall
apply for a construction permit.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of division (A) above
that the person performs construction within the right-of-way without a permit
because of an emergency situation.
   (C)   A person who undertakes work on behalf of a developer or public
service provider to construct utilities to serve a new subdivision, where such
work is in a proposed right-of-way, shall obtain a permit prior to the start of
construction. All work performed within the right-of-way proposed to be
dedicated to the city shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter.
   (D)   Prior to obtaining a permit, the public service provider must be
registered with the city.
   (E)   A construction permit is not required if the activity in the public
right-of-way consists exclusively of:
      (1)   Routine maintenance or repair of facilities that does not involve
any of the following: the cutting or breaking of pavement or a sidewalk; the
closure of a traffic lane for longer than 24 hours; boring; or excavation
greater than 500 cubic feet; or
      (2)   A connection of real property to a utility service on the same side
of the public right-of-way, if the connection does not require a pavement cut
in the right-of-way; or
      (3)   The replacement of a single damaged pole and associated work within
a ten foot radius of the damaged pole; or
      (4)   Installation of aerial lines on existing poles, or installation of
aerial lines on not more than ten new poles; or
      (5)   The installation of fire hydrants.
   (F)   The following procedures and requirements govern the application for
and issuance of a permit to perform construction within the public right-of-
way:
      (1)   Permit application.
         (a)   A permit application must be made in writing on a form obtained
from the Engineering Department. The application must be signed and submitted
by the permittee on behalf of the owner of the facility for which the permit is
requested. The application for permit must be filled out completely and
accurately. Any omissions or inaccuracies on the form may be cause for denial
of the permit at the city's discretion.
         (b)   A permit application must be submitted to the Director in
accordance with the time frames specified in the Public Right-of-Way Permitting
and Construction Manual.
         (c)   The Director shall state on the permit any reasonable additional
restrictions or requirements determined necessary. These additional
restrictions or requirements shall be considered a part of the permitted
activity.
         (d)   The permittee shall, as an express condition of the permit,
comply in all respects with the requirements prescribed for the permitted
activity in the Public Right-of-Way Permitting and Construction Manual and with
all other city ordinances and state or federal laws or regulations affecting
the permitted activity.
      (2)   Construction plan. The permit application on any project must
include submittal of construction plans to the Engineering Department. The
plans must conform to the standards set forth in the Public Right-of-Way
Permitting and Construction Manual. When required by the Texas Engineering
Practice Act, as amended, the plans must be sealed by a professional engineer
licensed to practice in the State of Texas.
      (3)   Storm water pollution prevention plan. The permittee shall submit
with the permit application two sets of a storm water pollution prevention plan
to the Engineering Department in cases where stream crossings are open cut.
      (4)   Traffic control plan. Any work that may impact traffic flow or
result in lane closures in any street shall comply with the requirements of the
most current edition of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
      (5)   Trench safety plan. Trench safety systems shall meet U.S.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration standards and requirements.
      (6)   Project documentation. Except in an emergency situation, the city
recommends that the permittee provides the Director a video tape in VHS format
or photographs of the project site before commencement of the work. The video
or photographs shall show fences, driveways, landscaping, roadways, sidewalks,
mailboxes, and other improvements along the length of the project.
   (G)   Construction in the public right-of-way may commence prior to
obtaining a permit if the public service provider determines a valid need to
perform work due to an emergency situation. The public service provider shall
give immediate verbal notice, including the reasons for the emergency
situation, to the Director. The public service provider shall provide a written
description of the work required by the emergency situation and submit an
application for a permit not later than the second business day following
commencement of the emergency situation,
   (H)   If no construction has commenced under a permit within 90 calendar
days after issuance of the permit, the permit becomes null and void, and a new
permit is required before construction may be performed in the public right-of-
way. The Director may grant an extension to a permit only before the permit
expires.
(Ord. 06-2006-46, passed 6-13-06)
Penalty, see § 157.99
§ 157.06 PERMIT DENIAL, REVOCATION AND APPEAL.
   (A)   The Director may refuse to issue a permit if:
      (1)   The public service provider does not have a valid registration on
file with the city;
      (2)   The proposed construction will substantially interfere with
vehicles or pedestrians and no procedures, or procedures inconsistent with this
chapter, have been identified to minimize the interference;
      (3)   The proposed construction will interfere with existing or proposed
facilities of the city, or existing facilities already in the public right-of-
way pursuant to a valid franchise;
      (4)   The proposed construction, incidental traffic control, or other
permitted activity, or the manner in which it is to be performed, will violate
a city ordinance or regulation or a state or federal statute or regulation; or
      (5)   The permittee:
         (a)   Fails to furnish all the information required by this chapter;
         (b)   Knowingly or intentionally furnishes false or incorrect
information to the Director;
         (c)   Fails, except for good cause shown, to file the application on
the approved form within the time limits prescribed by the Public Right-of-Way
Permitting and Construction Manual;
         (d)   Has violated a provision of this chapter twice within the two-
year period immediately preceding the date of application and has failed to
correct the violations;
         (e)   Is an independent contractor of a public service provider who
has been convicted of a violation of this chapter in the year preceding the
application;
         (f)   Is not in compliance with applicable requirements of an existing
permit issued under this chapter; or
         (g)   Has failed to reimburse the city for any costs owed pursuant to
this chapter.
   (B)   The Director may suspend construction or revoke an issued permit on
the same grounds for which a permit may be denied under division (A) above or
if the permittee:
      (1)   Commences or performs construction in violation of an applicable
requirement of this chapter or the permit;
      (2)   Creates or is likely to create a public health or safety hazard by
performance of the construction in question;
      (3)   Fails to comply with an order or regulation of the Director that is
applicable to the construction;
      (4)   Fails to comply with the restrictions or requirements of other city
ordinances or state or federal laws or regulations applicable to the
construction;
      (5)   Commences or performs work without having prior knowledge and
understanding of the applicable repair standards as specified in the Public
Right-of-Way Permitting and Construction Manual;
       (6)   Fails to comply with the requirements of the latest edition of the
Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices; or
      (7)   Fails to properly implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan.
   (C)   The Director shall provide immediate verbal notice of a suspension or
revocation to the permittee and forward written notice of a suspension or
revocation within two business days of the verbal notice. Construction that is
suspended may not resume until the Director determines that the permittee has
corrected the violation, noncompliance, or hazard that caused the suspension.
The Director may reinstate a permit that has been revoked if the Director
determines that:
      (1)   The permittee has corrected the violation, noncompliance, or hazard
that caused the revocation; and
      (2)   The health or safety of the public is not jeopardized by
reinstating the permit.
   (D)   If the Director denies or revokes a construction permit, the city
shall give notice by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the applicant or permittee. The applicant or permittee may appeal
the decision to deny or revoke by filing written notice with the City Manager,
within five days after receipt of notice. The City Manager shall mail or cause
to be personally delivered, written notice of the time and place of the hearing
to the person appealing. The notice shall be mailed to the address specified in
the notice of appeal form. The City Manager shall conduct a hearing and shall
make a decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at
the hearing. The City Manager shall notify the applicant or permittee by
personal service or by mail.
   (E)   The applicant or permittee may appeal the decision of the City Manager
to deny or revoke a permit by filing written notice with the City Secretary for
consideration of the City Council, within five days after receipt of notice of
the City Manager's decision. The City Secretary shall mail notice of the time
and place of the hearing to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal
form. The City Council shall conduct a hearing and shall make a decision on the
basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The decision
of the City Council shall be final.
(Ord. 06-2006-46, passed 6-13-06)
§ 157.07 VARIANCE.
   Any variance from the requirements of this chapter must be approved in
advance by the Director. The Director may grant a variance only if the
applicant demonstrates an extreme hardship and the public health, safety,
welfare, and convenience are not adversely affected by granting the variance.
The Director may not grant a variance from the indemnity requirements.
(Ord. 06-2006-46, passed 6-13-06)
§ 157.08 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A permittee shall cause all work performed within the public right-of-
way to be performed in a good and workmanlike manner and in faithful and strict
compliance with the permit, this chapter, other city ordinances, and
regulations promulgated by the Director relating to construction within the
public right-of-way.
   (B)   The installation, replacement, repair, or maintenance of any city
facility by the permittee shall be subject to inspection and approval by the
city. The permittee agrees to cooperate fully with the city in conducting the
inspection. Such inspections shall be conducted concurrent with the
installation, replacement, repair, or maintenance affecting the city's
facilities and a final inspection shall be made within a reasonable time after
completion of the project. The permittee shall promptly perform remedial action
required by the city pursuant to such an inspection.
   (C)   The permittee shall maintain the construction area in a manner that
avoids health hazards, and hazards to vehicular and pedestrian traffic until
the public right-of-way is permanently restored. Specific construction
requirements are contained in the Public Right-of-Way Permitting and
Construction Manual, as amended.
   (D)   A permittee performing construction in the public right-of-way shall,
upon completion of the work, restore the public right-of-way to a condition
that is equal to or better than the condition of the public right-of-way prior
to construction in a manner prescribed by the Public Right-of-Way Permitting
and Construction Manual, as amended.
   (E)   The permittee has the exclusive responsibility to coordinate with
other public service providers to protect all existing facilities in the public
right-of-way in which the construction occurs. Acceptance of the plans and
issuance of a permit does not constitute liability on the city's part for any
damage to existing facilities.
   (F)   The permittee has the exclusive responsibility to locate the extent of
the public right-of-way. Acceptance of the plans and issuance of a permit does
not constitute liability on the city's part for any facilities placed on
private property.
   (G)   If facilities are placed on private property, the public service
provider shall contact property owners and acquire easements or remove the
facilities from private property.
   (H)   When making a pavement cut or excavation, or placing soils or
excavated material in or along a public right-of-way, the permittee shall place
barricades, warning signs, and warning lights at the location sufficient to
warn the public of the hazard of the open cut, excavation, spoils, or excavated
material. These traffic control devices shall be placed in accordance with the
Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices requirements.
   (I)   If a street or alley must be totally closed for any duration, the
permittee shall provide for reasonable alternative access to the adjacent
properties at all times. If a sidewalk is to be closed or blocked for longer
than one day, the permittee shall provide a reasonable alternative for
pedestrian access.
   (J)   Sidewalks designated as school routes shall be open at all times on
days that school is in session, or a reasonable alternative shall be provided
before work commences. To be considered a reasonable alternative, a sidewalk
shall provide 36 inches minimum surface width.
   (K)   Except in an emergency situation, if a person's work in the right-of-
way will alter trees or shrubbery located within any public right-of-way, the
person shall first notify the adjacent property owners.
   (L)    A person commits an offense if the person cuts, defaces or in any way
injures a tree or shrub located within a public median without prior approval
from the Director or his designated representative. It is a defense to
prosecution that the person is topping trees to accommodate overhead utility
service.
   (M)   Temporary restoration of the public right-of-way may not remain for
more than ten business days after the completion of a repair or installation of
an underground structure or facility, unless a time extension has been granted
by the Director. The city may, at the expense of the permittee or other
responsible person, remove any temporary restoration remaining in the public
right-of-way beyond the ten-day time limit and make permanent repairs. Any
exception to the ten-day time limit, other than a relocation of a facility in
advance of a city construction project in the public right-of-way, must be
approved by the Director prior to expiration of the time limit.
   (N)   Except in an emergency, the permittee shall notify the Director in
writing 48 hours prior to any work requiring a permit proposed for a weekend.
   (O)   The contractor will maintain at all times on the job site a
responsible person proficient in speaking the English language, authorized to
receive and relay instructions from the city.
   (P)   A permittee shall:
      (1)   Maintain a copy of the excavation permit and accepted engineering
plans at the construction site available for inspection by the Director at all
times when construction or installation work is occurring;
      (2)   Complete all construction work authorized by the permit in the time
specified in the permit, unless the permittee has obtained an extension from
the Director; and
      (3)   Provide the Director access to the work and to such further
information he or she may reasonably require to ensure compliance with the
permit.
   (Q)   All concrete driveways and streets shall be bored rather than open
cut. If the concrete street is planned to be reconstructed within two years, or
for other good cause, the Director may grant an exception upon request.
   (R)   No pavement cuts in newly constructed, reconstructed, or resurfaced
(greater than one inch) asphalt streets shall be made for 60 months after the
substantial completion of the street work. The Director may grant an exception
based on the public service provider's written demonstration, if he finds that
the following criteria have been met:
      (1)   Boring or jacking without disturbing the pavement is not practical
due to physical characteristics of the street or alley or other utility
conflicts; and
      (2)   Alternative utility alignments that do not involve excavating the
street or alley are found to be impracticable; and
      (3)   The proposed excavation cannot reasonably be delayed until the 60
months deferment period has lapsed; or
      (4)   Emergency service restoration is required and no other timely
alternatives are
available; or
      (5)   New technology that sufficiently minimizes damage to the pavement
structure is
available; or
      (6)   A utility line required to be located is under the street.
   (S)   The Director may require the use of trenchless technology or boring
based on the following criteria:
      (1)   It is in the best interest of the city; and
      (2)   It is technically, commercially, and economically feasible; and
      (3)   It is not in violation of federal or state regulations or industry
safety standards.
   (T)   The permittee and any person responsible for construction shall
protect the public right-of-way surface, and all existing facilities and
improvements both above and below ground from excavated materials, equipment
operations, and other construction activities.
   (U)   The permittee shall ensure that no excavated material or contamination
of any type is allowed to enter or remain in a water or wastewater main or
access structure, drainage facility, or natural drainage feature.
(Ord. 06-2006-46, passed 6-13-06)
Penalty, see § 157.99
§ 157.09 IMPROPERLY CONSTRUCTED FACILITIES.
   (A)   A person shall:
      (1)   Properly construct, install, repair, relocate, and/or upgrade its
existing facilities within the public right-of-way; and
      (2)   Repair or restore any damage to other facilities, the public right-
of-way, or private property that occurs as a result of improper construction,
installation, repair, relocation, or upgrade of the public service provider's
facilities.
   (B)   Facilities will be considered to be improperly constructed, installed,
repaired, relocated, or upgraded if:
      (1)   The construction, installation, repair, relocation, or upgrade
endangers public health or safety; or
      (2)   The facilities encroach upon private property or extend outside the
right-of-way location designated in the permit without authorization; or
      (3)   The construction, design, or configuration of the facilities does
not comply with applicable local, state, or federal laws or regulations; or
      (4)   The construction, installation, repair, relocation, or upgrade is
conducted in a manner that damages private or public property or another public
service provider's facilities; or
      (5)   The facilities are not capable of being located or maintained using
standard practices; or
      (6)   The facilities are placed in an area that interferes with another
public service provider's existing facilities.
(Ord. 06-2006-46, passed 6-13-06)
Penalty, see § 157.99
§ 157.10 RESTORATION AND MAINTENANCE PERIOD.
   (A)   All construction performed under any permit granted to a person by the
city under this chapter must be maintained to the satisfaction of the Director
for two years after substantial completion of construction or repair.
   (B)   Work performed within the public right-of-way and outside the limits
of the pavement, that includes, but is not limited to, the surface, underground
infrastructure, irrigation system, landscaping, signage, and/or sidewalks is
subject to the two-year maintenance period. Should the city reasonably
determine, within two years from the date of the completion of work, that
additional restoration work is required, the permittee shall perform such
additional restoration work to the satisfaction of the city within 30 days
after the Director gives written notice to the permittee to correct the damage,
defect, or other problem. If the restoration work is not completed within 30
days, the work may be performed by the city, and costs for said work charged to
the permittee.
   (C)   The permittee shall notify the Director at least 24 hours before
commencing any repair operations. If a construction or excavation site is
subsequently disturbed by another party, including another permittee or the
city, any continuing obligation to maintain the overlapping area shall cease.
If the site is disturbed by another permittee, then that permittee shall be
subject to the maintenance period for the overlapping area.
   (D)   The Director shall notify the permittee in writing if the backfill on
a permitted pavement cut or excavation settles at any time during the two-year
maintenance period, causing subsidence in the pavement of one-half inch or
more, vertically measured in any three-foot horizontal direction. Upon
notification, the permittee shall commence repair work within ten days and
notify the Director 24 hours in advance of commencement of the repair work. If
the repair work is not commenced within 30 days or an appropriate extension as
approved by the City Manager, the repair work may be performed by the city.
   (E)   The decision of the Director as to the necessity of correcting any
damage, defect or other problem is binding on all parties.
   (F)   All damage caused directly or indirectly to the public right-of-way
surface or subsurface outside the construction area will be regarded as part of
the construction and must be included in the total area repaired.
   (G)   Upon failure of the permittee to perform any such repair or
restoration work described in divisions (A) through (E) above, the city may
repair such portion of the public right-of-way as may be required. The
permittee or public service provider shall reimburse the city for the actual
direct and indirect costs of the repair work.
(Ord. 06-2006-46, passed 6-13-06)
Penalty, see § 157.99
§ 157.11 EMERGENCY REPAIRS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   If the Director determines during construction that a temporary
emergency repair to a public right-of-way is necessary to correct a situation
that is hazardous to the public, the Director shall immediately notify the
permittee. If the permittee does not commence the emergency repair within a
reasonable time, the Director may cause performance of such temporary emergency
repair work as is necessary to correct the hazardous situation. The permittee,
or public service provider, shall reimburse the city for the actual direct and
indirect cost of the work necessary to correct the hazardous situation. The
permittee shall maintain the temporary emergency repair until the permittee
completes construction and permanent repairs.
   (B)   If the Director determines that a problem with a public service
provider's existing facility in a public right-of-way requires a temporary
emergency repair to correct a situation that is hazardous to the public, the
Director shall immediately notify the public service provider. If the public
service provider does not commence the emergency repair within a reasonable
time, the Director may cause performance of such temporary emergency repair
work as is necessary to correct the hazardous situation. The public service
provider shall reimburse the city for the actual direct and indirect cost of
the work necessary to correct the hazardous situation. The public service
provider shall maintain the temporary emergency repair until the public service
provider completes construction and permanent repairs.
(Ord. 06-2006-46, passed 6-13-06)
Penalty, see § 157.99
§ 157.12 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT COORDINATION.
   (A)   Whenever the Director deems it necessary to remove, alter, change,
relocate, or adapt the underground or overhead facilities of a public service
provider in the public right-of-way due to the city's reconstruction, widening,
or straightening of streets; placement or replacement of water, wastewater, or
storm water facilities; installation of traffic signals, traffic signs, and
streetlights; or construction of any other city public improvement project, the
public service provider that owns the facilities shall conform its facilities
to the city's project.
   (B)   The facilities must be conformed at the public service provider's
expense within 120 days after the Director sends final plans and notice to
relocate to the public service provider, unless:
      (1)   A different conformance schedule for the work is approved by the
Director, or
      (2)   The service provider's franchise or other agreement with the city
provides for different relocation requirements.
   (C)   Facilities of a public service provider that are not conformed within
the 120-day notice period or within the approved schedule or such additional
time as may have been granted by the city, may be deemed abandoned. Prior to
taking any action, the city will provide the service provider ten days notice
of intent to act. The city, and any person working under contract with the
city, will not be liable for any damage to or destruction or removal of the
facilities, or for any interruption or termination of service through the
facilities, caused by the activity of the city, or its contractors, in carrying
out the work described in division (A) above.
   (D)   A person performing construction within the public right-of-way for
the purpose of conforming facilities at the request of the city in advance
preparation for a public improvement project shall obtain a permit under this
chapter.
   (E)   The permittee shall maintain the construction area in accordance with
the requirements of the Public Right of Way Permitting and Construction Manual
or until the work order authorizing the construction of the public improvement
project is issued by the city, whichever comes first.
(Ord. 06-2006-46, passed 6-13-06)
Penalty, see § 157.99
§ 157.13 UTILITY STRUCTURES; PERMIT.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person places or installs a utility
structure within the public right-of-way without a construction permit. In
addition, a separate utility structure permit shall be required for structures
greater than 65 cubic feet in volume. The utility structure permit shall be
considered a part of the construction permit.
   (B)   Above ground utility structures shall be permitted in accordance with
division (A) above and shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Utility structures exceeding two feet in height shall not be placed
within any intersection visibility triangle.
      (2)   Utility structures less than 65 cubic feet in volume, with no
dimension greater than six feet, may be placed within the public right-of-way
without screening.
      (3)   Utility structures greater than 65 cubic feet in volume, and less
than 240 cubic feet in volume, and less than seven feet in height shall be
placed within a public or private utility easement outside the street right-of-
way
      (4)   Utility structures greater than 240 cubic feet in volume or more
than seven feet in height shall be located in a private utility easement or
other private property.
      (5)   The placement of the pad shall allow for existing and proposed
sidewalks.
      (6)   Utility structures shall comply with all requirements of other city
ordinances and other state and federal laws and regulations. The public service
provider shall be responsible for obtaining other permits, as required.
   (C)   Below ground utility structures shall be permitted in accordance with
division (A) above.
   (D)   (1)   In reviewing the utility structure permit application, the city
will consider the following:
         (a)   Size, location and impact of the proposed structure;
         (b)   The structure's coordination with existing and proposed public
facilities; and
         (c)   Availability of remaining right-of-way.
      (2)   If the city determines that the proposed utility structure cannot
be placed within the right-of-way without adversely affecting the integrity of
an existing or future facility owned by the city, or the safety of the
traveling public, the city shall have the right to deny the location of a new
or replacement utility structure within the said right-of-way and may provide
assistance in identifying alternative locations for the utility structure.
   (E)   A request for a waiver of the location and size requirements may be
made to the Director with respect to a particular site for a proposed utility
structure.
      (1)   The request for a waiver must include a detailed justification for
the waiver, including the lack of existing sites not within the public right-
of-way; alternative sites sought and reviewed; proof that compliance with the
requirement is impracticable; and the necessity of the utility structure and
its size at the proposed site to provide service.
      (2)   Within 30 calendar days of receipt of a written request for a
waiver, the Director may grant a waiver for good cause.
      (3)   In making this decision, the Director shall consider:
         (a)   The availability of other sites not located in the public right-
of-way and person's efforts to secure those sites;
         (b)   The size, location and impact of the proposed utility structure
in the right-of-way at the proposed site;
         (c)   Person's need to provide services to a property or area to be
served by the proposed site;
         (d)   Person's need for the proposed size of the utility structure to
provide services to a property or area to be served by the proposed site;
         (e)   The proximity of other utility structures and person's efforts
to collocate at those sites; and
         (f)   The public health, safety, welfare and convenience.
      (4)   The Director shall provide written notice to the applicant of a
decision regarding a waiver pursuant to this division.
      (5)   The Director's decision regarding the waiver shall be final.
   (F)   If a utility structure is proposed to be located on city property
other than public right-of-way, the following requirements apply:
      (1)   The service provider shall submit to the Director a plan showing
the facilities proposed to be constructed on city property. The structure shall
not be constructed without the city's approval.
      (2)   Nothing contained herein, however, shall ever be held or construed
to confer upon any person the right to place a utility structure upon city
property. The city reserves the right, at its sole discretion, to enter into an
agreement to allow the placement of a utility structure on city property.
      (3)   The city shall not be liable for damages or losses of any kind
whatsoever by reason of injury to property or person occasioned by the use of
any city property. The city shall have no obligations in regard to the
maintenance of any improvements within such city property. The public service
provider shall defend the city at its cost and expense from all claims and
demands arising from the placement or maintenance of the structures.
      (4)   The use of city property for the placement of a utility structure
shall be discontinued and improvements removed within 90 days of notification
by the city and the cost of the discontinuation and removal of improvements
shall be borne by the owner of the improvement.
      (5)   The public service provider shall pay city a fee for use of the
property based upon the fair market value as determined by the city. In
addition to a use fee, the city may, to the extent permitted by law, require
the public service provider to provide network connectivity and/or conduit to
the city.
      (6)   The public service provider shall cooperate with other providers in
connection with allowing co-location of facilities within the utility
structure.
(Ord. 06-2006-46, passed 6-13-06)
Penalty, see § 157.99
§ 157.14 INDEMNITY.
   (A)   Except as to certificated telecommunication providers, or a public
service provider whose current franchise contains an indemnity which provides
that it is controlling over this provision, each person and public service
provider installing, maintaining, removing or repairing facilities in the
public right-of-way shall promptly defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless
from and against all damages, costs, losses or expenses including any and all
claims, lawsuit, judgments, costs, liens, losses expenses, fees (including
reasonable attorney's fees and costs of defense) proceedings, actions demands,
causes of action, liability, and suits of any kind and nature, including
personal or bodily injury (including death), property damage, or other harm for
which recovery of damages is sought, that is found by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be caused solely by the negligent act, error, or omission of
the public service provider or any agent, officer, director, representative,
employee, affiliate, or subcontractor of the public service provider or their
respective officers, agents, employees, directors, or representatives, or any
other person while installing, repairing, maintaining, or removing facilities
in a public right-of-way.
   (B)   The indemnity provided by this section does not apply to any liability
resulting from the negligence of the city or its officers, employees
contractors, or subcontractors. If the public service provider and the city are
found jointly liable by a court of competent jurisdiction, liability shall be
apportioned comparatively in accordance with the laws of this state without,
however, waiving any governmental immunity available to the city under state
law and without waving any defenses of the parties under state law.
   (C)   The provisions of this indemnity are solely for the benefit of the
city and are not intended to create any rights, contractual or otherwise, to
any person or entity.
   (D)   A permittee who is a certificated telecommunication provider as
defined in Tex. Local Gov't Code Chapter 283, as amended, shall give the city
the indemnity provided in Tex. Local Gov't Code § 283.057, as amended.
(Ord. 06-2006-46, passed 6-13-06)
§ 157.15 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   The effective date of this chapter is July 1, 2006.
   (B)   Any permit issued prior to the effective date will remain subject to
the terms and conditions of city procedures in effect at the time of issuance
of the permit and is not affected by this chapter, except that, upon expiration
or conclusion of the permit, a new or renewal permit must be obtained in
accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 06-2006-46, passed 6-13-06)
§ 157.16 NETWORK NODES IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Generally. This section shall be construed in accordance with Chapter
284 of the TEX. LOCAL GOV’T CODE to the extent not in conflict with the
Constitution and laws of the United States or of the State of Texas. To the
extent of any conflict between this section and the remainder of
Chapter 157 of this code, this section controls.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the definitions found in
the City's Design Manual for the Installation of Network Nodes and Node Support
Poles are hereby incorporated into this section and shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. In addition, the
definitions from § 284.002 of the TEX. LOCAL GOV’T CODE are specifically
incorporated into this section by reference. In addition, in this section:
      CHAPTER 284. Means Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code.
      CITY. The City of Cleburne, Texas.
      CITY COUNCIL. The governing body of the City of Cleburne, Texas.
      DESIGN MANUAL. The city's Design Manual for the Installation of Network
Nodes and Node Support Poles.
      EASEMENT. Means and shall include any public easement or other compatible
use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for public utility
purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. EASEMENT shall include a private
easement used for the provision of utilities.
      FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION or FCC. The Federal administrative
agency, or lawful successor, authorized to oversee cable television and other
multi-channel regulation on a national level.
      MICRO NETWORK NODE. A network node that is not larger in dimension than
24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height, and that has
an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches.
      STREET.  Only the paved portion of the right-of-way used for vehicular
travel, being the area between the inside of the curb to the inside of the
opposite curb, or the area between the two parallel edges of the paved roadway
for vehicular travel where there is no curb. A STREET is generally part of, but
smaller in width than the width of the entire right-of-way, while a right-of-
way may include sidewalks and utility easements. A STREET does not include the
curb or the sidewalk, if either are present at the time of a permit application
or if added later.
      TRANSPORT FACILITY. Each transmission path physically within right-of-
way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the
network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes.
      WIRELESS FACILITIES. Means MICRO NETWORK NODES, NETWORK NODES, and NODE
SUPPORT POLES as those terms are defined in Chapter 284.
   (C)   Use and occupancy of public rights-of-way. Pursuant to this section
and subject to the Design Manual and Chapter 284, a wireless network provider
has the nonexclusive right to use and occupy the public rights-of-way in the
city for the purpose of constructing, maintaining, and operating its facilities
used in the provision of wireless facilities. The terms of this section shall
apply to all wireless network providers' facilities used, in whole or part, in
the provision of wireless services throughout the city, including any annexed
areas upon the effective date of annexation or the date the city provides the
company written notice, whichever date occurs later.
   (D)   Compliance with this chapter, the Design Manual, applicable codes, and
Chapter 284. All wireless network providers shall comply with the terms of this
section and the remainder of Chapter 157 of this code, and are hereby included
in the definition of a PUBLIC SERVICE PROVIDER for the purposes of this
chapter. All wireless network providers shall also comply with applicable
codes, the terms and conditions of the city's Design Manual, and Chapter 284.
   (E)   Permit applications.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 284, a network provider
shall obtain a permit or permits from the city to install a network node, node
support pole, or transport facility in a public right-of-way.
      (2)   As required by Chapter 284, the city shall not require a network
provider to perform services for the city for which the permit is sought.
      (3)   A network provider that wants to install or collocate multiple
network nodes inside the municipal limits of the city is entitled to file a
consolidated permit application with the city for not more than 30 network
nodes, and upon payment of the applicable fee(s), receive a permit or permits
for the installation or collocation of those network nodes.
      (4)   The network provider shall provide the following information in its
permit applications:
         (a)   Applicable construction and engineering drawings and information
to confirm that the applicant will comply with this chapter, the city's Design
Manual, Chapter 284, and applicable codes;
         (b)   Any additional information reasonably related to the network
provider's use of the public rights-of-way to ensure compliance with the Design
Manual and this section;
         (c)   A certificate that the network nodes comply with applicable
regulations of the Federal Communications Commission; and certification that
the proposed network nodes will be placed into active commercial service by or
for the network provider not later than the 60th day after the date of
construction and final testing of each network node is completed.
      (5)   Exception. As provided in § 284.157 of Chapter 284, a network
provider is not required to apply, obtain a permit, or pay a rate to the city
for:
         (a)   Routine maintenance that does not require excavation or closing
of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way;
         (b)   Replacing or upgrading a network node or network pole with a
node or pole that is substantially similar in size or smaller and that does not
require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public
right-of-way; or
         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or
replacement of micro network nodes that are strung on cables between existing
poles or node support poles in compliance with the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         (d)   The network provider or its contractors shall notify the city at
least 24 hours in advance of work described in this division (5).
   (F)   Installation in Historic Districts or Design Districts. A network
provider must obtain advance written consent from the City Council before
collocating new network nodes or installing new node support poles in an area
of the city that has been zoned or otherwise designated as a Historic District
or as a Design District if the district has decorative poles. The network
provider shall be required to comply with the requirements described in the
city's Design Manual. The city has the authority to designate new Historic
Districts and Design Districts in the future.
   (G)   Installation in municipal parks and residential areas. A network
provider may not install a new node support pole in a public right-of-way
without the City Council's discretionary, nondiscriminatory, and written
consent if the public right-of-way:
      (1)   Is in a municipal park; or
      (2)   Is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is:
         (a)   Not more than 50 feet wide; and
         (b)   Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily
residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning
or deed restrictions.
      (3)   In addition to the above, a network provider installing a network
node or node support pole in a public right-of-way shall comply with private
deed restrictions and other private restrictions in the area that apply to
those facilities.
      (4)   The network provider shall be further required to comply with
guidelines set out in the city's Design Manual.
   (H)   Municipal review process by the city.
      (1)    Determination of application completeness. The city shall
determine whether the permit application is complete and notify the applicant
of that determination:
         (a)   For network nodes and node support poles, no later than 30 days
after the date the city receives the permit application; and
         (b)   For a transport facility, no later than ten days after the date
the city receives the permit application.
      (2)   Approval or denial of application. The city shall approve or deny a
completed application after the date it is submitted to the city:
         (a)   For network nodes, no later than 60 days after the date the city
receives the complete application;
         (b)   For network support poles, no later than 150 days after the date
the city receives the complete application; and
         (c)   For transport facilities, no later than 21 days after the city
receives the complete application.
      (3)   Basis for denial of application. If an application is denied by the
city, it shall document the basis for the denial, including the specific
applicable city code provisions or other city rules, regulations, or other law
on which the denial is based. The documentation for the denial must be sent by
electronic mail to the applicant on or before the date that the city denies the
application.
      (4)   Resubmission of denied application.  The applicant may cure the
deficiencies identified in the denial application.
         (a)   The applicant has 30 days from the date the city denies the
completed application to cure the deficiencies identified in the denial
documentation without paying an additional application fee, other than any fee
for actual costs incurred by the city.
         (b)   The city shall approve or deny the revised completed application
after a denial not later than the 90th day after the city receives the revised
completed application. The city's review shall be limited to the deficiencies
cited in the denial documentation.
   (I)   Time of installation.  A network provider shall begin installation for
which a permit is granted not later than six months after final approval of the
application and shall diligently pursue installation to completion. The
Director may in their sole discretion grant reasonable extensions of time as
requested by the network provider.
   (J)   Applicable fees and rental rates to the city.
      (1)   As compensation for the network provider's use and occupancy of the
public rights-of-way, the network provider shall pay application fees and
annual public right-of-way rental rates as set forth below, which shall be in
lieu of any lawful tax, license, charge, right-of-way permit, use,
construction, street cut or inspection fee; or other right-of-way related
charge or fee, whether charged to the network provider or its contractor(s)
within the city, except the usual general ad valorem taxes, special assessments
and sales tax levied in accordance with state law and equally applicable to all
general businesses in the city.
      (2)   Network nodes.
         (a)   The application fee shall be $100 for each network node for up
to but not more than 30 network nodes.
         (b)   The annual public right-of-way rate shall be $250 per network
node installed in the city public rights-of-way.
         (c)   As provided in § 284.054 of Chapter 284, the city may adjust the
amount of the annual public right-of-way rate not more than annually by an
amount equal to one-half the annual change, if any, in the Consumer Price Index
(CPI). The city shall provide written notice to each network provider of the
new rate; and the rate shall apply to the first payment due to the city on or
after the 60th day following the written notice.
      (3)   Node support poles. The application fee for each network support
pole shall be $100.
      (4)   Transfer facilities.
         (a)   The application fee for each transfer facility shall be $100.
         (b)   The annual transfer facility rental rate shall be $28 monthly
for each network node site located in a public right-of-way. However, no rate
is required if the network provider is already paying the city an amount equal
to or greater than the amount of other city right-of-way fees for access lines
under Chapter 283 of the TEX. LOCAL GOV’T CODE or cable franchise fees under
Chapter 66 of the TEX. UTILITIES CODE.
      (5)   Micro network nodes.  No application fee is required for a micro
network node if the installation is attached on lines between poles or node
support poles.
      (6)   Collocation of network nodes on service poles.  Subject to the
city's license agreement, the collocation of network nodes on city service
poles shall be at a rate of $20 per year per service pole.
      (7)   City-owned municipal utility poles. A network provider shall pay an
annual pole attachment rate for the collocation of a network node supported by
or installed on a city-owned utility pole based upon the pole attachment rate
consistent with § 54.024 of the TEX. UTILITIES CODE, applied on a per-foot
basis.
   (K)   Indemnity. As provided in § 284.302 of Chapter 284, a network provider
shall indemnify, defend, and hold the city harmless from and against all
liability, damages, cost, and expense, including reasonable attorney's fees,
arising from injury to person or property proximately caused by the negligent
act or omission of the network provider. The city shall promptly notify the
network provider of any claims, demands, or actions ("claims") covered by this
indemnity after which the network provider shall defend the claims. The network
provider shall have the right to defend and compromise the claims. The city
shall cooperate in the defense of the claims. The foregoing indemnity
obligations shall not apply to claims arising solely from the negligence of the
city; however, they shall apply in the case of all claims which arise from the
joint negligence of the network provider and the city; provided that in such
cases, the amount of the claims for which the city shall be entitled to
indemnification shall be limited to that portion attributable to the network
provider. Nothing in this section shall be construed as waiving any
governmental immunity available to the city under state law or waiving any
defenses of the parties under state law.
   (L)   Effect on other utilities and telecommunication providers.  Nothing in
this section shall govern attachment of network nodes on poles and other
structures owned or operated by investor-owned electric utilities, electric
cooperatives, telephone cooperatives, or telecommunication providers.
(Ord. 08-2017-40, passed 8-22-17)
§ 157.17 RIGHT-OF-WAY, ALLEY, AND EASEMENT ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   Administrative charges assessed. There is assessed a minimum
administrative fee of $250 for the abandoning and vacating of city rights-of-
way, alleys or easements.
   (B)   Application; procedure.
      (1)   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the City Council
may consider the abandonment and vacation of rights-of-way, alleys, or
easements at any time without submitting an application or complying with the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   Any person desiring to have a city right-of-way, alley, or easement
abandoned and vacated shall make applications for the same to the City
Engineer. The application shall be accompanied by the following:
         (a)   The signed and acknowledged written consent and release of all
utility companies that may have facilities or planned facilities to which
access and use would be materially and substantially impaired if the proposed
abandonment is granted.
         (b)   Administrative fee as provided in §
157.17(A).
         (c)   Legal description and sketch of the requested abandonment area.
   (C)   Requirements and effect of abandonment and vacation.
      (1)   No right-of-way, alley, or easement shall be abandoned and vacated
unless the City Council determines in the abandoning ordinance that the right-
of-way, alley, or easement is no longer useful or convenient to the public and
that abandonment and vacation is in the public interest, and all requirements
of this section and all other applicable ordinances and laws are satisfied.
Whenever a right-of-way, alley, or easement is to be abandoned, the abandoning
ordinance shall provide for how the property to be abandoned shall be sold,
vacated or divided between the abutting property owners as outlined in the Tex.
Local Gov’t Code.
      (2)   Before such ordinance shall be considered by the City Council, a
public hearing shall be held. Notice of the public hearing furnished in writing
to all property owners within 200 feet as listed on the most current tax rolls
and notice shall be published in the official newspaper of the city at least
ten days prior to the public hearing.
   (D)   Retention of utility easement upon abandoning and vacating street,
alley or easement. Upon the abandoning and vacating of any right-of-way, alley,
or easement, the city shall have the right, if it so desires, to retain a
utility easement within the street, alley or easement abandoned.
(Ord. 01-2021-02, passed 1-12-21)
§ 157.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter
for which no other penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty set
forth in §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person or persons, firm or corporation which violates any of the
provisions of §
157.03(B)(2)(c) or (d) is punishable by a fine of not less than $500 nor more
than $2,000 for each offense, and each violation hereof shall be deemed a
separate and distinct offense for each day it continues, and shall be
punishable as such.
(Ord. 06-2006-46, passed 6-13-06)
CHAPTER 158: IMPACT FEES
Section
General Provisions
   
158.001   Purpose and policy
   
158.002   Authority
   
158.003   Definitions
   
158.004   Applicability
   
158.005   Impact fee as condition of development approval
   
158.006   Impact fees schedules
   
158.007   Service unit determination
   
158.008   Assessment of impact fees
   
158.009   Calculation and collection of impact fees
   
158.010   Credits against impact fees
   
158.011   Establishment of accounts
   
158.012   Use of proceeds of impact fee accounts
   
158.013   Appeals
   
158.014   Refunds
   
158.015   Rebate
   
158.016   Updates to plan and revision of fees
   
158.017   Functions of advisory committee
   
158.018   Contract for capital improvements
   
158.019   Use of other financing mechanisms
   
158.020   Impact fee as additional and supplemental regulation
   
158.021   Relief procedures
   
158.022   Exemptions
Land Use Assumptions
   
158.035   Land use assumptions
Water Facilities Impact Fees
   
158.050   Water service area
   
158.051   Water capital improvements plan
   
158.052   Water facilities impact fees
Wastewater Facilities Impact Fees
   
158.065   Wastewater service area
   
158.066   Wastewater capital improvements plan
   
158.067   Wastewater facilities impact fees
Roadway Facilities Impact Fees
   
158.080   Roadway service area
   
158.081   Roadway capital improvements plan
   
158.082   Roadway facilities impact fees
   
Appendix A   Table of Water and Wastewater Service Unit Equivalencies
   
Appendix B   Table of Vehicle-Mile Equivalencies
   
Appendix C   Water Service Area
   
Appendix D   Water Capital Improvements Plan
   
Appendix E   Wastewater Service Area
   
Appendix F   Wastewater Capital Improvement Plan
   
Appendix G   Roadway Service Areas
   
Appendix H   Roadway Capital Improvements Plan
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 158.001 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   This chapter is intended to assure the provision of adequate public
facilities for water, wastewater and roadway facilities to serve new
development by requiring each such development to pay its pro rata share of the
costs of such improvements necessitated by and attributable to such new
development, in conformance with the provisions of Tex. Loc. Gov't. Code Ch.
395.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.002 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to Tex. Loc. Gov't. Code Ch. 395, and
pursuant to the Cleburne City Charter. The provisions of this chapter shall not
be construed to limit the power of the city to utilize other methods authorized
by state law or pursuant to other city powers to accomplish the purposes set
forth herein, either in substitution for or in conjunction with this chapter.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.003 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms shall apply to this chapter as written unless context
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADVISORY COMMITTEE. The capital improvements advisory committee established
by the city to perform the duties required by Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch. 395, as
amended.
   AREA-RELATED FACILITY. A capital improvement or facility expansion which is
designated in the impact fee capital improvements plan and which is not a site
related facility. AREA-RELATED FACILITY may include a capital improvement which
is located offsite, or within or on the perimeter of the development site.
   ASSESSMENT. The determination of the amount of the maximum impact fee per
service unit which can be imposed on new development pursuant to this chapter.
   BUILDING PERMIT. Written permission issued by the city for the construction,
repair, alteration or addition to a structure.
   CAPITAL CONSTRUCTION COST OF SERVICE. Costs of constructing capital
improvements or facility expansions, including and limited to the construction
contract price, surveying and engineering fees, land acquisition costs,
including easement and land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees,
and expert witness fees, interest charges and other finance costs for bonds,
notes or other obligations issued to finance capital improvements identified in
the capital improvements plan, and the fees actually paid or contracted to be
paid to an independent qualified engineer or financial consultant preparing or
updating the capital improvements plan who is not an employee of the city.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT. Either a roadway facility, a water facility or a
wastewater facility, with a life expectancy of three or more years, to be owned
and operated by or on behalf of the city.
   CITY. The City of Cleburne, Texas.
   CREDIT. The amount of the reduction of an impact fee due, determined under
this chapter or pursuant to administrative guidelines that is equal to the
value of area related facilities provided by a property owner pursuant to the
city's subdivision or zoning regulations or requirements, for the same type of
facility.
   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT APPROVAL. An agreement between the city and a property
owner, which provides for the payment of the obligations assessed under this
chapter as agreed to by both parties.
   FACILITY EXPANSION. The expansion of the capacity of an existing facility
which services the same function as an otherwise necessary new capital
improvement in order that the existing facility may serve new development.
Facility expansion does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or
expansion of an existing facility to better serve existing development.
   FINAL PLAT. The point at which the applicant has complied with all
conditions of approval in accordance with the city's subdivision regulations
and the plat has been filed with Johnson County.
   GROWTH-RELATED COSTS. Capital construction costs related to providing
additional service units to new development, either from excess capacity in
existing facilities, from facility expansions or from new capital facilities,
and includes those items specified in Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 395.012. GROWTH-
RELATED COSTS do not include:
      (1)   Construction, acquisition, or expansion of public facilities or
assets other than capital improvements or facility expansions identified in the
capital improvements plan;
      (2)   Repair, operation, or maintenance of existing or new capital
improvements or facility expansions;
      (3)   Upgrading, updating, expanding, or replacing existing capital
improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety,
efficiency, environmental, or regulatory standards;
      (4)   Upgrading, updating, expanding, or replacing existing capital
improvements to provide better service to existing development;
      (5)   Administrative and operating costs of the city; and
      (6)   Principal payments and interest or other finance charges on bonds
or other indebtedness, except for such payments for growth-related facilities
contained in the capital improvements plan.
   IMPACT FEE. Either a fee for roadway facilities, a fee for water facilities
or a fee for wastewater facilities imposed on new development by the city
pursuant to this chapter in order to generate revenue to find or recoup the
costs of capital improvements or facility expansion necessitated by and
attributable to such new development. IMPACT FEES do not include the dedication
of rights-of-way or easements for such facilities, or the construction of such
improvements, imposed pursuant to the city's zoning or subdivision regulations.
   IMPACT FEE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN. Either a roadway capital improvements
plan, a water capital improvements plan or a wastewater capital improvements
plan adopted or revised pursuant to this chapter and Tex. Local Gov’t Code, Ch.
395.
   INDUSTRIAL USE. Any new development for an industrial use or any building
containing such use(s), as defined in the city's Zoning Ordinance.
   INSTITUTIONAL USE. New development to be used for a school, camp or church.
   LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS. The projections of population and employment growth
and associated changes in land uses, densities and intensities adopted by the
city, as may be amended and updated from time to time, upon which the capital
improvements plans are based.
   LAND USE EQUIVALENCY TABLE. A table converting the demands for capital
improvements generated by various land uses to numbers of service units, as may
be amended and updated from time to time.
   MULTI-FAMILY USE. New development for use as multi-family dwellings under
the city's zoning ordinance.
   NEW DEVELOPMENT. A project involving the construction, reconstruction,
redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of
any structure; or any use or extension of the use of land; any of which has the
effect of increasing the requirements for capital improvements or facility
expansions, measured by the number of service units to be generated by such
activity, and which requires either the approval of a plat pursuant to the
city's subdivision regulations, the issuance of a building permit, or
connection to the city's water or wastewater system, and which has not been
exempted from these regulations by provisions herein.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. All new development which is not residential
development.
   OFFSET. The amount of the reduction of an impact fee designed to fairly
reflect the value of system-related facilities, pursuant to rules herein
established or administrative guidelines, provided and funded by a developer
pursuant to the city’s subdivision regulations or requirements.
   PLAT. Has the meaning given the term in the city's subdivision regulations.
PLAT includes replat.
   PLATTING. The act of preparing for approval and processing the plat for the
new development. PLATTING includes replatting.
   PROPERTY OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm, corporation,
governmental entity or any other legal entity having legal title to or
sufficient proprietary interest in the property on which new development is to
occur. Property owner includes the developer for the new development.
   RECOUPMENT. The imposition of an impact fee to reimburse the city for
capital improvements which the city has previously oversized to serve new
development and is a part of the approved capital improvement plan.
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. For purposes of calculating impact fees, a lot
developed for use and occupancy as a residence or residences, according to the
city's zoning ordinance.
   RETAIL/COMMERCIAL/OFFICE USE. For purposes of calculating impact fees, a
permitted use under the city's “CO,” “C1,” “C2,” “C3,”  ”C4 Private Club
Overlay District,” “Original Downtown Overlay District,” “Commercial/Industrial
Overlay District” or a retail, commercial or office use within a Planned
Development Zoning District under the City's Zoning Ordinance, or a commercial
or office use on property zoned “M1,” “M2,” “IH,” “PD,” “Historic District
Overlay” zoning district classification.
   ROADWAY. Any freeway, expressway, principal or minor arterial or collector
roadways designated in the city's adopted thoroughfare plan, as may be amended
from time to time.
   ROADWAY CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN. The adopted plan, as may be amended and
updated from time to time, which identifies the roadway facilities or roadway
expansions and their costs for each road service area, which are necessitated
by and which are attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed
ten years, which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition
of road facilities fees pursuant to this chapter.
   ROADWAY FACILITY. An improvement or appurtenance to a roadway which
includes, but is not limited to, rights-of-way, whether conveyed by deed or
easement; intersection improvements; traffic signals; turn lanes; drainage
facilities associated with the roadway; street lighting or curbs. ROADWAY
FACILITY also includes any improvement or appurtenance to an intersection with
a roadway officially enumerated in the Federal or Texas highway system. The
term includes the city’s share of costs for roadways and associated
improvements designated on the Federal or Texas highway system, including local
matching funds and costs related to utility line relocation and the
establishment of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drainage appurtenances, and rights-
of-way. ROADWAY FACILITY excludes site-related facilities.
   ROADWAY FACILITY EXPANSION. Expansion of the capacity of any existing
roadway improvement for the purpose of service to new development, not
including the repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of the existing
roadway facility to serve existing development. Service area means the areas
within the boundaries of the city to be served by the improvements or facility
expansion specified in the capital improvements plan.
   SERVICE AREA. Either a roadway service area, a water service area or
wastewater service area within the city and, except for roadway facilities,
within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, within which impact fees for
capital improvements or facility expansion will be collected for new
development occurring within such area and within which fees so collected will
be expended for those types of improvements or expansions identified in the
type of capital improvements plan applicable to the service area.
   SERVICE UNIT. The applicable standard units of measure shown on the land use
equivalency table in the impact fees capital improvements plan which can be
converted to vehicle miles in p.m. peak hour, for roadway facilities, or three-
fourths (3/4”) inch water meter equivalents, for water or for wastewater
facilities, which serves as the standardized measure of consumption, use or
generation attributable to the new unit of development.
   SITE-RELATED FACILITY. An improvement or facility which is for the primary
use or benefit of a new development and/or which is for the primary purpose of
safe and adequate provision of roadway, water or wastewater facilities to serve
the new development, and which is not included in the impact fees capital
improvements plan and for which the property owner is solely responsible under
subdivision or other applicable development regulations.
   SYSTEM-RELATED FACILITY. A capital improvement or facility expansion which
is designated in the capital improvements plan and which is not a site-related
facility.
   UNIT COST(S). The amount(s) identified in the capital improvements plan, as
the value of each unit of measurement used for a particular capital
improvement.
   UTILITY CONNECTION. Installation of a water meter for connecting a new
development to the city's water and/or wastewater system, or connection to the
city's wastewater system.
   WASTEWATER CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN. The adopted plan, as may be amended
and updated from time to time, which identifies the wastewater facilities or
wastewater expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and
which are attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten
years, and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition
of wastewater facilities fees pursuant to this chapter.
   WASTEWATER FACILITY. A wastewater interceptor or main, lift station or other
facility included within and comprising an integral component of the city's
collection system for wastewater. WASTEWATER FACILITY includes land, easements
or structures associated with such facilities. WASTEWATER FACILITY excludes a
site-related facility.
   WASTEWATER FACILITY EXPANSION. The expansion of the capacity of any existing
wastewater improvement for the purpose of serving new development, but does not
include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing
sewer facility to serve existing development.
   WATER FACILITY. A water interceptor or main, pump station, storage tank or
other facility included within and comprising an integral component of the
city's water storage or distribution system. WATER FACILITY includes land,
easements or structures associated with such facilities. WATER FACILITY
excludes site-related facilities.
   WATER FACILITY EXPANSION. The expansion of the capacity of any existing
water facility for the purpose of serving new development, but does not include
the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing water
improvement to serve existing development.
   WATER IMPROVEMENTS PLAN. The adopted plan, as may be amended and updated
from time to time, which identifies the water facilities or water expansions
and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable
to new development, for a period not to exceed ten years, and which are to be
financed in whole or in part through the imposition of water facilities impact
fees pursuant to this chapter.
   WATER METER. A device for measuring the flow of water to a development,
building or residence, whether for domestic or for irrigation purposes.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.004 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter apply to all new development within the
corporate boundaries of the city; and, as to water and wastewater impact fees,
in its extraterritorial jurisdiction. The provisions of this chapter apply
uniformly within each service area.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.005 IMPACT FEE AS CONDITION OF DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL.
   No final plat for new development shall be approved within the service area
without assessment of an impact fee pursuant to this chapter. No building
permit shall be issued or for property outside the city limits, application for
connection to the city’s water or wastewater system be made, until the property
owner has paid the impact fee imposed by and calculated herein, unless a
different time and/or method of payment has been authorized by contract between
the city and the property owner.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.006 IMPACT FEES SCHEDULES.
   Impact fee schedules may be amended and updated from time to time utilizing
the amendment procedure set forth in §
158.016.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.007 SERVICE UNIT DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Service units are established in accordance with generally accepted
engineering and planning standards.
   (B)   For water and wastewater impact fees, service units shall be
calculated in accordance with the attached
Appendix A – Table of Water and Wastewater Service Unit Equivalencies, as
determined by the size of the water meter(s) for the development, or
alternatively, as approved the Director of Public Works as a result of an
engineering report prepared by a qualified professional engineer licensed to
perform such professional engineering services in the State of Texas, which
demonstrates that the number of service unit equivalents (SUE’s) for the new
development will be different than those indicated by the size of the water
meter.
   (C)   If the Director of Public Works determines that the water pressure in
the city's transmission main is significantly higher or lower than standard
pressure such that the size of the water meter is not indicative of actual
service demand, the Director may adjust the number of SUE’s based on a smaller
or larger sized meter which more accurately reflects the flow rate and the
system pressure conditions.
   (D)   In determining the number of service units for water and wastewater,
the following rules shall apply:
      (1)   Each new freestanding building requires a new water meter, except
as provided in division (2).
      (2)   Where a site is redeveloped (clearance and reconstruction), no new
service units will be attributed to such redevelopment, provided that the water
meter is of the same size as the development previously occupying the site. If
meter size is increased, the number of service units will be based upon the
increase in capacity of the meter.
      (3)   Existing buildings or land uses may be expanded using existing
meter service. No service units will be attributed to such development if the
water meter size remains the same. If the meter size is increased, the number
of service units will be based upon the increase in capacity of the meter.
      (4)   If an existing structure or use does not require a water meter for
water or wastewater service, or does not generate the need for water or
wastewater service, no service units will be attributable to such use or
structure.
      (5)   Upon wastewater tap purchase for lots for which no water meter has
been purchased, service units shall be established by a professional engineer
licensed in the State of Texas, shall be reviewed by the Director of Public
Works, which shall designate the appropriate number of service units.
      (6)   In determining the number of service units for wastewater impact
fees, no service units will be attributed to irrigation meters.
      (7)   Service units attributed to irrigation meters within the medians
and parkways of thoroughfares as shown on the city's thoroughfare plan shall be
paid in accordance with the development agreement between the city and the
developer.
      (8)   A one-time credit for a three-fourths inch irrigation meter shall
be attributed for the landscaping of a residential subdivision's entryways.
Additional charges for larger meter(s) shall be paid by the developer/owner.
   (F)   For roadways, service units shall be calculated in accordance with
Appendix B – Table of Vehicle-Mile Equivalencies.
   (G)   The City Council may revise the service unit equivalency tables
according to the procedure set forth in Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch. 395 and its
successors.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.008 ASSESSMENT OF IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Assessment of the impact fee for any new development shall be made as
follows:
      (1)   For new development which is submitted for approval pursuant to the
city's subdivision regulations after June 20, 1987, or for which replatting
results in an increase in the number of service units after such date,
assessment shall be at the time of subdivision final plat approval, and shall
be the amount of the impact fee per service unit, as provided in the exhibits
to this chapter that are in effect at the time of subdivision final plat
approval. For a new development which has received final plat approval before
February 13, 2018, assessment shall be as adopted by the city on February 13,
2018.
      (2)   For new development which has received final plat approval prior to
June 20, 1987, and for which no replatting is necessary prior to the issuance
of a building permit, assessment shall be upon the issuance of a building
permit, and shall be the amount of the impact fee per service unit set forth in
this chapter that is in effect at the time of building permit application.
      (3)   For new development which occurs or is proposed to occur without
platting, assessment shall be upon the issuance of a building permit or water
or sewer tap purchase (whichever occurs first), and shall be the amount of the
impact fee per service unit set forth in the exhibits to this chapter that are
in effect at the time of building permit application.
      (4)   For water and wastewater facilities, fees shall not be assessed to
a development for which taps previously were purchased and which development
does not result in an increase in the number of living unit equivalents as
determined by the service unit equivalency table. If the exchange of said taps
will result in an increase in the number of SUE’s, impact fees for the increase
in the number of SUE’s shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter that are in effect at the time of subdivision plat approval.
      (5)   Because fire protection is of critical concern to the community as
a whole, water demand related solely to fire protection is not subject to
assessment or collection of a water or wastewater impact fee. However, if the
fire protection capacity of the fire demand meter is routinely utilized for
domestic purposes as evidenced by the registration of consumption recorded on
the city's meter-reading and billing systems, the current owner of the property
shall be assessed the impact fees currently in effect at the time such
conversion is established by the city for the fire protection capacity which
has been converted to domestic capacity by its routine usage as domestic
capacity.
   (B)   Following assessment of the impact fee above, no additional impact
fees or increases thereof shall be assessed against that development unless the
number of service units increases.
   (C)   Following the lapse or expiration of approval for a plat, a new
assessment must be performed at the time a new application for such development
is filed.
   (D)   For purposes of this section, a final plat shall not include an
amending plat.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.009 CALCULATION AND COLLECTION OF IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   The impact fees due for roadway facilities shall be collected at the
time of issuance of a building permit for any work on the subject property,
unless a development agreement between the developer and the city has been
executed providing for a different time or method of payment, whichever comes
first.
   (B)   For areas where water and wastewater capacity is available:
      (1)   The city shall collect all impact fees due at the time the city
issues a building permit; or
      (2)   For land platted outside the corporate boundaries of the city, the
city shall collect the fees for water or wastewater facilities at the time an
application for an individual meter connection to the city's water or
wastewater system is filed.
   (C)   If the building permit for which an impact fee has been paid has
expired, and a new application is thereafter filed, the impact fees due shall
be computed using the schedule then in effect, and previous payments of impact
fees shall be credited against the new fees due.
   (D)   The city shall calculate the impact fees due for the new development
in the following manner:
      (1)   The amount of each impact fee due shall be determined by
multiplying the number of service units generated by the new development by the
impact fee due per service unit for the service area using
Appendix A – Table of Water and Wastewater Service Unit Equivalencies. The
number of service units shall be determined according to §
158.007.
      (2)   The amount of each impact fee due shall be reduced by any allowable
credits for that category of capital improvements, in the manner provided in §
158.010.
   (E)   The amount of each impact fee due for a new development shall not
exceed an amount computed by multiplying the maximum impact fee per service
unit under
Appendix A – Table of Water and Wastewater Service Unit Equivalencies by the
number of service units generated by the development.
   (F)   Whenever the property owner proposes to increase the number of service
units for a development, the additional impact fees collected for such new
service units shall be determined by using the schedule then in effect and such
additional fee shall be collected either prior to or at the time of issuance of
a new building permit, or prior to or at the time of enlargement of the
connection to the city's water or wastewater system.
   (G)   Residential irrigation meter exemption. The payment of the water
impact fee shall not be required by an existing residential customer for the
installation of a meter to serve a separate lawn irrigation system provided all
of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The lawn irrigation meter does not exceed the three-quarter inch by
five-eighths inch standard basic meter size;
      (2)   The lawn irrigation shall be located on the same property as the
residential meter;
      (3)   The residential property must be owner-occupied; and
      (4)   The lawn irrigation meter only serves the lawn irrigation system.
      (5)   The upgrade of a three-quarter inch by five-eighths inch lawn
irrigation meter to a one inch meter shall require payment of a water impact
fee based on the difference between the base meter size and the water impact
fee for a one inch meter.
      (6)   No exemption or pro-rata credit shall apply for any meter size
exceeding one inch for a lawn irrigation meter.
   (H)   On property that receives final plat approval before February 13,
2018, no impact fees shall be collected on any service unit for which a valid
building permit is issued on or before February 13, 2019. If a building permit
obtained within that period subsequently expires, and no new application is
made and approved within such period, the new development shall be subject to
the payment of impact fees. On property that receives final plat approval on or
after February 13, 2018, and before July 1, 2018, no impact fees shall be
collected on any service unit for which a valid building permit is issued
before July 1, 2018. If a building permit obtained within that period
subsequently expires, and no new application is made and approved within such
period, the new development shall be subject to the payment of impact fees.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.010 CREDITS AGAINST IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   The city shall offset the present value of any system-related
facilities, pursuant to rules established in this section, which have been
dedicated to and have been received by the city, including the value of capital
improvements constructed pursuant to an agreement with the city, against the
value of the impact fee due for that category of capital improvement.
   (B)   All offsets and credits against impact fees shall be subject to the
following limitations and shall be granted based on this chapter and additional
standards promulgated by the city, which may be adopted as administrative
guidelines.
      (1)   No offset or credit shall be given for the dedication or
construction of site-related facilities.
      (2)   The unit costs used to calculate the offsets shall not exceed those
assumed for the capital improvements included in the capital improvements plan
for the category of facility within the service area for which the impact fee
is imposed.
      (3)   If an offset or credit applicable to a plat has not been exhausted
within ten years from the date of plat filing or within such period as may be
otherwise designated by contract, such offset or credit shall expire.
      (4)   The city will not reimburse the property owner or developer for an
offset or credit when no impact fees for the new development can be collected
pursuant to this chapter or for any value exceeding the total impact fees due
for the development for that category of capital improvement, unless otherwise
agreed to by the city.
   (C)   An applicant for new development must apply for an offset or credit
against impact fees due for the development either at or before the time of fee
payment, unless the city agrees to a different time. The applicant shall file a
petition for offsets or credits with the city. The city must provide the
applicant, in writing, with a decision on the offset or credit request,
including the reasons for the decision. The decision shall specify the maximum
value of the offset or credit which may be applied against an impact fee, which
value and the date of the determination shall be associated with the plat for
the new development.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.011 ESTABLISHMENT OF ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The city shall establish an account to which interest is allocated for
each service area for each type of capital facility for which an impact fee is
imposed pursuant to this chapter. Each impact fee collected within the service
area shall be deposited in such account.
   (B)   Interest earned on the account into which the impact fees are
deposited shall be considered funds of the account and shall be used solely for
the purposes authorized in §
158.012.
   (C)   The city shall establish adequate financial and accounting controls to
ensure that impact fees disbursed from the account are utilized solely for the
purposes authorized in this chapter. Disbursement of funds shall be authorized
by the city at such times as are reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes
and intent of these regulations; provided, however, that funds shall be
expended within a reasonable period of time, but not to exceed ten years from
the date impact fees are deposited into the account.
   (D)   The City Finance Department shall maintain such records as are
necessary to ensure that refunds are appropriately made and such other
information as may be necessary for the proper implementation of this chapter.
   (E)   The city shall maintain and keep financial records for impact fees,
which shall show the source and disbursement of all fees collected in or
expended within each service area. The records of the account into which impact
fees are deposited shall be open for public inspection and copying during
ordinary business hours.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.012 USE OF PROCEEDS OF IMPACT FEE ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The impact fees collected for each service area pursuant to these
regulations may be used to finance or to recoup the costs of any capital
improvements or facility expansion identified in the applicable capital
improvements plan for the service area, including but not limited to the
construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, land acquisition
costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees, and
expert witness fees). Impact fees may also be used to pay the principal sum and
interest and other finance costs on bonds, notes or other obligations issued by
or on behalf of the city to finance such capital improvements or facility
expansion. Impact fees also may be used to pay fees actually contracted to be
paid to an independent qualified engineer or financial consultant for
preparation of or updating the impact fee capital improvements plan.
   (B)   Impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall not be used to
pay for any of the following expenses:
      (1)   Construction, acquisition or expansion of capital improvements or
assets other than those identified in the applicable capital improvements plan;
      (2)   Repair, operation, or maintenance of existing or new capital
improvements;
      (3)   Upgrade, expansion or replacement of existing capital improvements
to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency,
environmental or regulatory standards;
      (4)   Upgrade, expansion, or replacement of existing capital improvements
to provide better service to existing development; provided, however, that
impact fees may be used to pay the costs of upgrading, expanding or replacing
existing capital improvements in order to meet the need for new capital
improvements generated by new development; or
      (5)   Administrative and operating costs of the city.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.013 APPEALS.
   (A)   The property owner or applicant for new development may appeal the
following decisions of the Director of Public Works to the City Council:
      (1)   The applicability of an impact fee to the development;
      (2)   The amount of the impact fee due;
      (3)   The availability of, the amount of, or the expiration of a credit;
      (4)   The application of a credit against an impact fee due;
      (5)   The amount of the impact fee in proportion to the benefit received
by the new development; or
      (6)   The amount of a refund due, if any.
   (B)   The appellant must file a written notice of appeal with the City
Secretary within 30 days following the Director of Public Work's decision. If
the notice of appeal is accompanied by a payment or other security satisfactory
to the City Attorney in an amount equal to the original determination of the
impact fee due, the development application may be processed while the appeal
is pending.
   (C)   At the hearing, the City Council shall consider all relevant evidence
and shall allow testimony from the applicant, city staff and other interested
persons relevant to the appeal. The hearing may be continued from time to time.
   (D)   Following the hearing, the City Council shall consider all evidence
and determine whether the appeal should be granted (in whole or in part) or
denied.
   (E)   The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the
amount of the fee or the amount of the credit was not calculated according to
the applicable schedule of impact fees or the guidelines established for
determining credits. The applicant shall submit an engineering report prepared
by a qualified professional engineer licensed to perform such engineering
services in the State of Texas, which demonstrates that the applicant's burden
has been met.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.014 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Upon application, any impact fee or portion thereof collected pursuant
to these regulations, which has not been expended within the service area
within ten years from the date of payment, shall be refunded to the record
owner of the property for which the impact fee was paid or, if the impact fee
was paid by another governmental entity, to such governmental entity, together
with interest calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund at
the statutory rate as set forth in Tex. Finance Code § 302.002, or its
successor statute. The application for refund pursuant to this section shall be
submitted within 60 days after the expiration of the ten-year period for
expenditure of the fee. An impact fee shall be considered expended on a first-
in, first-out basis.
   (B)   An impact fee collected pursuant to these regulations shall also be
considered expended if the total expenditures for capital improvements or
facility expansion authorized in §
158.012 within the service area within ten years following the date of payment
exceeds the total fees collected within the service area for such improvements
or expansions during such period.
   (C)   If a refund is due pursuant to divisions (A) or (B), the city shall
divide the difference between the amount of expenditures and the amount of the
fees collected by the total number of service units assumed within the service
area for the period to determine the refund due per service unit. The refund to
the record owner shall be calculated by multiplying the refund due per service
unit by the number of service units for the development for which the fee was
paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount.
   (D)   Upon completion of all the capital improvements or facility expansion
identified in the capital improvements plan for the service area, the city
shall recalculate the maximum impact fee per service unit using the actual
costs for the improvements or expansions. If the maximum impact fee per service
unit based on actual cost is less than the impact fee per service unit paid,
the city shall refund the difference, if such difference exceeds the impact fee
paid by more than 10%. If the difference is less than 10%, no refund shall be
due. The refund to the record owner shall be calculated by multiplying such
difference by the number of service units for the development for which the fee
was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount.
   (E)   If a tract of land for which an impact fee has been paid is replatted,
resulting in a reduction in the number of service units, and the new impact fee
to be collected is less than that paid, the city shall refund the difference,
provided that water meters to serve the development have not been installed.
   (F)   No refunds or credits against impact fees due shall be given for
decreasing the number or size of water meters serving a development, except as
provided in division (E).
   (G)   A petition for a refund shall be submitted to the Director of Public
Works. Within one month of the date of receipt of a petition for refund, the
Director of Public Works must provide the petitioner, in writing, with a
decision on the refund request, including the reasons for the decision. If a
refund is due to the petitioner, the Director of Public Works shall notify the
Finance Director and request that a refund payment be made to the petitioner.
The petitioner may appeal the Director's determination to the Council, as set
forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.015 REBATE.
   If the building permit for a new development for which an impact fee has
been paid has expired, no utility connections for that category of capital
improvements have been made to the development, and a modified or new
application has not been filed within six months of such expiration, the city
shall, upon written application, rebate the amount of the impact fee to the
record owner of the property for which the impact fee was paid. If no
application for rebate pursuant to this subsection has been filed within this
period, no rebate shall become due.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.016 UPDATES TO PLAN AND REVISION OF FEES.
   (A)   The city shall update its land use assumptions and capital
improvements plans at least every five years, commencing from the date of
adoption of such plans, and shall recalculate the impact fees based thereon in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Tex. Local Gov't. Code, Ch. 395, or
in any successor statute.
   (B)   The city may review its land use assumptions, impact fees, capital
improvements plans and other factors such as market conditions more frequently
than provided in division (A) to determine whether the land use assumptions and
capital improvements plans should be updated and the impact fee recalculated
accordingly.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.017 FUNCTIONS OF ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The Advisory Committee shall perform the following functions:
      (1)   Advise and assist the city in adopting land use assumptions;
      (2)   Review the capital improvements plans and file written comments
thereon.
      (3)   Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements
plans;
      (4)   Advise the city of the need to update or revise the land use
assumptions, capital improvements plans and impact fees; and
      (5)   File a semiannual report evaluating the progress of the capital
improvements plans and identifying perceived inequities in implementing the
plans or administering the impact fees.
   (B)   The city shall make available to the advisory committee any
professional reports prepared in the development or implementation of the
capital improvements plans.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.018 CONTRACT FOR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   An owner of a new development may construct or finance a capital
improvement or facility expansion designated in the capital improvements plan,
if required or authorized by the city, by entering into an agreement with the
city prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. The
agreement shall be on a form approved by the city, and shall identify the
estimated cost of the improvement or expansion, the schedule for initiation and
completion of the improvement or expansion, a requirement that the improvement
be designed and completed to city standards and such other terms and conditions
as deemed necessary by the city. The agreement shall provide for the method to
be used to determine the amount of the offset to be given against impact fees
due for the development.
   (B)   In the event that the city elects to reimburse an owner for the
dedication, construction or financing of a capital improvement or facility
expansion designated in the capital improvements plan, the terms of
reimbursement shall be incorporated in the agreement required by division (A).
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.019 USE OF OTHER FINANCING MECHANISMS.
   (A)   The city may finance capital improvements or facility expansion
designated in the capital improvements plan through the issuance of bonds,
through the formation of public utility districts or other assessment
districts, or through any other authorized mechanism, in such manner and
subject to such limitations as may be provided by law, in addition to the use
of impact fees.
   (B)   Except as herein otherwise provided, the assessment and collection of
an impact fee shall be additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution
of, any other tax, fee, charge or assessment which is lawfully imposed on and
due against the property.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.020 IMPACT FEE AS ADDITIONAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATION.
   Impact fees established by these regulations are additional and supplemental
to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the city on
the development of land or the issuance of building permits or certificates of
occupancy. Such fee is intended to be consistent with and to further the
policies of city's comprehensive land use plan, the capital improvements plan,
the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations and other city policies,
ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of
adequate public facilities in conjunction with the development of land.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.021 RELIEF PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Any person who has paid an impact fee or an owner of land upon which
an impact fee has been paid may petition the City Council to determine whether
any duty required by this chapter has not been performed within the time so
prescribed.
   (B)   The petition shall be in writing and shall state the nature of the
unperformed duty and request that the duty be performed within 60 days of the
request. If the City Council determines that the duty is required pursuant to
this chapter and is late in being performed, it shall cause the duty to
commence within 60 days of the date of the request and to continue until
completion. This division is not applicable to matters which may be appealed
pursuant to §
158.013.
   (C)   The City Council may grant a variance from any requirement of this
chapter, upon written request by a developer or owner of property subject to
this chapter, following a public hearing, and only upon finding that a strict
application of such requirement would, when regarded as a whole, result in
confiscation of the property.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.022 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following are exempt from the payment of impact fees as applied in this
section:
   (A)   Public school districts. Pursuant to Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code § 395.022,
as amended, a public school district is not required to pay impact fees imposed
under this section unless the Board of Trustees of the district consents to the
payment of the fees by entering into a contract with the city imposing the
fees.
   (B)   Non-profit affordable housing.
      (1)   Development undertaken by a non-profit organization that qualifies
as affordable housing under 42 U.S.C. § 12745, as amended, may be eligible for
exemption from impact fee collection, subject to City Council approval. To
request an exemption, the applicant must submit a formal letter to the Director
of Public Works or their designee, including:
         (a)   A description of the proposed development, including location
and number of housing units;
         (b)   Documentation verifying the applicant’s non-profit status; and
         (c)   Supporting information demonstrating compliance with the
requirements for affordable housing as defined in 42 U.S.C. § 12745.
      (2)   If an exemption is granted but the development is not constructed
as affordable housing or later ceases to qualify, the city shall assess and
collect applicable impact fees based on the rates in effect at the time of
building permit or water meter issuance.
(Ord. 05-2025-19, passed 5-27-25)
LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS
§ 158.035 LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.
   The land use assumptions may be amended and updated from time to time, or
new land use assumptions may be adopted, pursuant to the procedures in §
158.016.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
WATER FACILITIES IMPACT FEES
§ 158.050 WATER SERVICE AREA.
   (A)   There is hereby established a water service area, as depicted on
Appendix C.
   (B)   The boundaries of the water service area may be amended and updated
from time to time, or new water benefit areas may be delineated, pursuant to
the procedures in §
158.016.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.051 WATER CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.
   (A)   The water capital improvements plan for the city is hereby adopted as
Appendix D, which is on file in the office of the City Secretary and
incorporated by reference herein.
   (B)   The water capital improvements plan may be amended and updated from
time to time, pursuant to the procedures in §
158.016.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.052 WATER FACILITIES IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   The maximum impact fees per service unit for water facilities are
hereby adopted and incorporated in
Appendix A – Table of Water and Wastewater Service Unit Equivalencies, which is
on file in the office of the City Secretary and made a part hereof by
reference.
   (B)   The impact fees per service unit for water facilities, which are to be
paid by each new development, are hereby adopted and incorporated in
Appendix A – Table of Water and Wastewater Service Unit Equivalencies, which is
on file in the office of the City Secretary and made a part hereof by
reference.
   (C)   The impact fees per service unit for water facilities may be amended
and updated from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in §
158.016.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
WASTEWATER FACILITIES IMPACT FEES
§ 158.065 WASTEWATER SERVICE AREA.
   (A)   There is hereby established a wastewater service area, as depicted on
Appendix E above referenced.
   (B)   The boundaries of the wastewater service area may be amended and
updated from time to time or new wastewater service areas may be delineated,
pursuant to the procedures in §
158.016.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.066 WASTEWATER CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.
   (A)   The wastewater capital improvements plan for the city is hereby
adopted as
Appendix F, which is on file in the office of the City Secretary and
incorporated by reference herein.
   (B)   The wastewater capital improvements plan may be amended and updated
from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in §
158.016.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.067 WASTEWATER FACILITIES IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   The maximum impact fees per service unit for wastewater facilities are
hereby adopted and incorporated in
Appendix A– Table of Water and Wastewater Service Unit Equivalencies, which is
on file in the office of the City Secretary and made a part hereof by
reference.
   (B)   The impact fees per service unit for wastewater facilities, which are
to be paid by each new development, are hereby adopted and incorporated in
Appendix A – Table of Water and Wastewater Service Unit Equivalencies, which is
on file in the office of the City Secretary and made a part hereof by
reference.
   (C)   The impact fees per service unit for wastewater facilities may be
amended and updated from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in §
158.016.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
ROADWAY FACILITIES IMPACT FEES
§ 158.080 ROADWAY SERVICE AREA.
   (A)   There is hereby established nine roadway service areas, as depicted on
Appendix G.
   (B)   The boundaries of the roadway service areas may be amended and updated
from time to time, or new roadway service areas may be delineated, pursuant to
the procedures in §
158.016.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.081 ROADWAY CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.
   (A) The roadway capital improvements plan for the city is hereby adopted as
Appendix H, which is on file in the office of the City Secretary and
incorporated by reference herein.
   (B)   The roadway capital improvements plan may be amended from time to
time, pursuant to the procedures in §
158.016.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
§ 158.082 ROADWAY FACILITIES IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   The maximum impact fees per service unit for roadway facilities are
hereby adopted and incorporated in
Appendix B – Table of Vehicle-Mile Equivalencies, which is on file in the
Office of the City Secretary and made a part hereof by reference.
   (B)   The impact fees per service unit for roadway facilities, which are to
be paid by each new development, are hereby adopted and incorporated in
Appendix B – Table of Vehicle-Mile Equivalencies, which is on file in the
office of the City Secretary and made a part hereof by reference.
   (C)   The impact fees per service unit for roadway facilities may be amended
and updated from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in §
158.016.
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18)
APPENDIX A: TABLE OF WATER AND WASTEWATER SERVICE UNIT EQUIVALENCIES
APPENDIX A: TABLE OF WATER AND WASTEWATER SERVICE UNIT EQUIVALENCIES
Meter Size Type Maximum Flow (gpm) (1) Service Unit Equivalents
Meter Size Type         Maximum Flow (gpm) (1) Service Unit Equivalents
3/4"       Displacement 25                     1.0
1"         Displacement 40                     1.6
1 1/2"     Displacement 50                     2.0
2"         Displacement 100                    4.0
3"         Compound     320                    12.8
3"         Ultrasonic   350                    14.0
4"         Compound     500                    20.0
4"         Ultrasonic   600                    24.0
6"         Compound     1,000                  40.0
6"         Ultrasonic   800                    32.0
8"         Ultrasonic   2,000                  80.0
12"        Ultrasonic   4,000                  160.0
(1) Safe maximum operating capacity is based on AWWA standards C700 and
C702.
 
   The maximum allowable water impact fees per service unit: $6,307.
   The maximum allowable wastewater impact fees per service unit: $18,608
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18; Am. Ord. 10-2024-66, passed 10-22-24)
APPENDIX B: TABLE OF VEHICLE-MILE EQUIVALENCIES
                                                            Total Service
ITE Land Use ITE Code Development Avg. Trip Rate  Avg. Trip Units
                      Unit        with Deductions Length    (Veh-Mi/ Dev
                                                            Unit)
                                                                 Total Service
ITE Land Use    ITE Code Development   Avg. Trip Rate  Avg. Trip Units
                         Unit          with Deductions Length    (Veh-Mi/ Dev
                                                                 Unit)
Residential
Single-family
detached        210      DU            0.94            4.38      4.11
housing
Multifamily
housing (1- 3   220      DU            0.51            4.38      2.23
floors)
Residential
condominium/    230      DU            0.36            4.38      1.58
townhouse
Senior adult
housing -       251      DU            0.30            4.02      1.21
detached
Continuing care
retirement      255      DU            0.19            4.02      0.76
community
Office
General office  710      1,000 sq. ft. 1.44            3.84      5.54
Corporate
headquarters    714      1,000 sq. ft. 1.30            4.75      6.18
bldg
Medical-dental  720      1,000 sq. ft. 3.93            3.86      15.15
office
U.S. Post       732      1,000 sq. ft. 11.21           3.20      35.92
Office
Research and
development     760      1,000 sq. ft. 0.98            4.75      4.66
center
Business park   770      1,000 sq. ft. 1.22            4.75      5.80
Commercial/Retail
Hotel           310      Rooms         0.59            1.66      0.98
All-suites      311      Rooms         0.36            1.66      0.60
hotel
Motel           320      Rooms         0.36            1.66      0.60
Movie theater   444      Screens       17.19           1.32      22.69
with matinee
Building
materials and   812      1,000 sq. ft. 3.37            0.44      1.50
lumber store
Free-standing
discount        813      1,000 sq. ft. 3.13            1.59      4.99
superstore
Variety store   814      1,000 sq. ft. 6.82            1.59      10.86
Hardware/paint  816      1,000 sq. ft. 1.37            0.44      0.61
store
Garden center   817      1,000 sq. ft. 6.94            1.05      7.30
Nursery         818      1,000 sq. ft. 5.24            1.05      5.51
(wholesale)
Shopping        820      1,000 sq. ft. 1.36            1.65      2.24
center1
Automobile      841      1,000 sq. ft. 3.75            1.79      6.71
sales
Auto parts      843      1,000 sq. ft. 2.16            0.92      1.98
sales
Tire store      848      1,000 sq. ft. 2.33            1.65      3.83
Tire superstore 849      1,000 sq. ft. 1.31            1.65      2.16
Supermarket     850      1,000 sq. ft. 2.34            0.74      1.72
Convenience              Fueling
market with     853      positions     2.10            0.71      1.49
gasoline pumps
Discount club   857      1,000 sq. ft. 0.80            0.92      0.74
Home
improvement     862      1,000 sq. ft. 0.64            1.56      1.00
superstore
Electronic      863      1,000 sq. ft. 1.15            1.41      1.62
superstore
Toy superstore  864      1,000 sq. ft. 4.99            1.85      9.24
Apparel store   876      1,000 sq. ft. 4.12            1.36      5.59
Arts and crafts 879      1,000 sq. ft. 6.21            0.92      5.71
store
Pharmacy with   881      1,000 sq. ft. 3.90            0.42      1.64
drive thru
Furniture store 890      1,000 sq. ft. 0.08            1.87      0.16
Bank with drive 912      1,000 sq. ft. 5.74            1.05      6.04
thru
Quality         931      1,000 sq. ft. 2.26            1.50      3.39
restaurant
High turnover
restaurant      932      1,000 sq. ft. 2.85            1.56      4.44
(sit-down)
Fast food with  934      1,000 sq. ft. 8.82            1.41      12.46
drive thru
Quick                    Serving
lubrication     941      positions     8.70            1.14      9.95
vehicle stop
Automotive care 942      1,000 sq. ft. 3.11            1.80      5.60
center
Gas/service
station with    945      Fueling       1.73            0.71      1.22
convenience              positions
market
Light Industrial
General light   110      1,000 sq. ft. 0.65            3.98      2.59
industrial
Industrial park 130      1,000 sq. ft. 0.34            3.98      1.35
Manufacturing   140      1,000 sq. ft. 0.74            4.11      3.04
Mini warehouse  151      1,000 sq. ft. 0.26            2.54      0.66
(self- storage)
Utilities       170      1,000 sq. ft. 0.76            3.98      3.02
Public/Institutional
Middle/Jr. high 522      1,000 sq. ft. 1.19            1.20      1.43
school
High school     530      1,000 sq. ft. 0.97            1.60      1.55
Private school  534      Students      0.60            1.65      0.99
(K-8)
Jr./Community   540      Students      0.11            1.68      0.18
college
Church          560      1,000 sq. ft. 0.49            0.96      0.47
Day care center 565      Students      0.79            0.66      0.52
Notes: 1 Average trip rate modified for maximum 250,000 sq. ft. consideration
 
Service Area Maximum Allowable Cost Per Service Unit
Service Area Maximum Allowable Cost Per Service Unit
1            $0
2            $3,061
3            $1,594
4            $638
5            $2,887
6            $2,765
7            $0
8            $0
9            $3,153
 
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18; Am. Ord. 10-2024-66, passed 10-22-24)
APPENDIX C: WATER SERVICE AREA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7717.png]
 
(Ord. 07-2021-31, passed 7-13-21)
APPENDIX D: WATER CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN
                Percent Utilization   Cost Based on 2024 Dollars
No. Project               10-year     Capital Financing Total        Impact Fee
    Description 2024 2034 Utilization Cost    Cost      Project Cost Eligible
                                                                     Cost
                   Percent Utilization   Cost Based on 2024 Dollars
No. Project                  10-year                  Financing   Total        Impact Fee
    Description    2024 2034 Utilization Capital Cost Cost        Project Cost Eligible
                                                                               Cost
Existing Eligible
    Lower Pressure
A   Plane East 16- 4%   7%   3%          $6,400,000   $4,879,594  $11,279,594  $338,388
    inch Loop
Proposed Eligible
    Pressure Plane
1   Boundary       63%  72%  9%          $328,800     $250,689    $579,489     $52,154
    Conversion
    Industrial
    Pump Station
2   and Ground     0%   100% 100%        $8,251,700   $6,291,398  $14,543,098  $14,543,098
    Storage Tank
    Expansion
    Airport Pump
3   Station and    0%   48%  48%         $6,391,100   $4,872,809  $11,263,909  $5,406,676
    Ground Storage
    Tank Expansion
    Industrial
4   Suction Line   0%   100% 100%        $5,296,800   $4,038,474  $9,335,274   $9,335,274
    Expansion
    Industrial
5   Discharge Line 0%   100% 100%        $7,670,000   $5,847,889  $13,517,889  $13,517,889
    Expansion
    West 24-inch
6   Water Line     36%  60%  24%         $5,053,500   $3,852,974  $8,906,474   $2,137,554
    Expansion
    West Highway
7   67 24-inch     0%   41%  41%         $14,435,800  $11,006,383 $25,442,183  $10,431,295
    Water Line
    20-inch
8   Transmission   14%  34%  20%         $3,533,600   $2,694,146  $6,227,746   $1,245,549
    Line Expansion
    Additional
9   Water Supply   0%   61%  61%         $25,000,000  $19,060,916 $44,060,916  $26,877,159
    Infrastructure
    Additional
    Water
10  Distribution   0%   0%   0%          $39,000,000  $29,735,029 $68,735,029  $0
    Infrastructure
    (Phase 1)
Total Capital Improvement Cost           $121,361,300 $92,530,302 $213,891,602 $83,885,036
* Utilization in 2024 on proposed projects indicates a portion of the project that will be
used to address deficiencies within the existing system, and therefore are not eligible
for impact fee cost recovery for future growth.
** Financing costs calculated assuming a 4.5% interest rate over a 30-year term.
 
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18; Am. Ord. 10-2024-66, passed 10-22-24)
APPENDIX E: WASTEWATER SERVICE AREA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7719.png]
 
(Ord. 07-2021-31, passed 7-13-21)
APPENDIX F: WASTEWATER CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN
                Percent Utilization   Cost Based on 2024 Dollars
No. Project               10-year     Capital Financing Total        Impact Fee
    Description 2024 2034 Utilization Cost    Cost      Project Cost Eligible
                                                                     Cost
                   Percent Utilization   Cost Based on 2024 Dollars
No. Project                  10-year                  Financing    Total Project  Impact Fee
    Description    2024 2034 Utilization Capital Cost Cost         Cost           Eligible
                                                                                  Cost
Existing Eligible
    WWTP Expansion
A   Permitting and 0%   79%  79%         $6,238,600   $4,756,357   $10,995,137    $8,686,158
    Preliminary
    Design
B   WWTP 3.0 MGD   0%   79%  79%         $33,695,700  $25,690,836  $59,386,536    $46,915,364
    Expansion
    Buffalo Creek
C   24-inch        0%   11%  11%         $3,349,700   $2,553,934   $5,903,634     $649,400
    Interceptor
    Railhead
D   Addition 12-   25%  26%  1%          $875,000     $667,132     $1,542,132     $15,421
    inch
    Interceptor
Proposed Eligible
    New North
1   Industrial/    0%   0%   0%          $150,000     $114,365     $264,365       $0
    Municipal WWTP
    Siting Study
    30-inch Sewer
    Line
2   Replacement    67%  90%  23%         $32,987,300  $25,150,726  $58,138,026    $13,371,746
    along West
    Buffalo Creek
    30-inch Sewer
    Line
3   Replacement    49%  65%  16%         $25,093,200  $19,131,975  $44,225,175    $7,076,028
    along East
    Buffalo Creek
    30-inch Sewer
    Line
4   Replacement    49%  60%  11%         $25,662,000  $19,565,649  $45,227,649    $4,975,041
    along East
    Buffalo Creek
    North
    Wastewater
5   Conveyance     34%  79%  45%         $73,957,200  $56,387,679  $130,344,879   $58,655,196
    Infrastructure
    - Option 1
    Additional
6   Treatment      0%   0%   0%          $145,080,000 $110,614,308 $255,694,308   $0
    Capacity
    15-inch
    Interceptor
7   Extension      0%   24%  24%         $8,086,800   $6,165,673   $14,252,473    $3,420,593
    along McAnear
    Creek Part 1
    1.06 MGD
    Thunder Bay
8   Lift Station   47%  95%  48%         $5,744,200   $4,379,589   $10,123,789    $4,859,418
    Expansion and
    Force Main
    Upsizing
    US-67 12-inch
9   and 24-inch    0%   32%  32%         $2,727,600   $2,079,622   $4,807,222     $1,523,526
    Interceptors
    Woodward Lift
10  Station        0%   32%  32%         $4,609,800   $3,514,680   $8,124,480     $2,599,834
    Decommission
    New 3.0 MGD
    Lift Station,
    16-inch Force
11  Main, and 24-  49%  99%  50%         $24,071,800  $18,353,222  $42,425,022    $21,212,511
    inch
    Interceptor
    Expansion
    15-inch
    Interceptor
12  Extension      0%   24%  24%         $5,079,600   $3,872,873   $8,952,473     $2,148,594
    along McAnear
    Creek Part 2
    12-inch
    Interceptor
13  Extension and  14%  25%  11%         $2,336,600   $1,781,509   $4,118,109     $452,992
    Meadowview
    Lift Station
    Decommission
    McAnear Creek
14  Interceptor    67%  91%  24%         $15,366,300  $11,715,830  $27,082,130    $6,499,711
    Expansion
    Miranda
15  Meadows 12-    0%   9%   9%          $3,301,200   $2,516,956   $5,818,156     $523,634
    inch
    Interceptor
    West Lake
16  Wastewater     0%   33%  33%         $153,022,800 $116,670,189 $269,692,989   $99,998,686
    Service
    Infrastructure
    Central
17  Interceptor    53%  58%  5%          $19,635,800  $14,971,053  $34,606,853    $1,625,208
    Expansion
    Hyde Park
18  Boulevard      44%  58%  14%         $7,087,200   $5,403,541   $12,490,741    $1,718,859
    Interceptor
    Expansion
    18-inch
19  Interceptor    54%  69%  15%         $15,884,400  $12,110,849  $27,995,249    $4,101,913
    Expansion
20  New 24-inch    0%   12%  12%         $19,586,400  $14,933,389  $34,519,789    $4,142,375
    Interceptor
    Thunder Bay
21  Road           46%  51%  5%          $8,588,400   $6,548,111   $15,136,511    $756,826
    Interceptor
    Expansion
Total Capital Improvement Cost           $642,217,600 $489,650,228 $1,131,867,828 $284,929,034
 
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18; Am. Ord. 10-2024-66, passed 10-22-24)
APPENDIX G: ROADWAY SERVICE AREAS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7721.png]
 
(Ord. 07-2021-31, passed 7-13-21)
APPENDIX H: ROADWAY CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35c5919fc87cfa5d47a809cf92f38285eed45574/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8075.png]
 
(Ord. 05-2018-36, passed 5-8-18; Am. Ord. 10-2024-66, passed 10-22-24)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Texas Statutes
References to 1968 Code
References to Ordinances
References to Resolutions
REFERENCES TO TEXAS STATUTES
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
 
State Cite        Code Section
Rule 332.4        96.02
Title 16, Ch. 85  119.31
Title 16, Ch. 86  119.31
Title 30, Ch. 288 51.003
Ch. 217.10        154.100
                  
 
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CODE
State Cite Code Section
State Cite Code Section
1.04       98.096
Ch. 32  �Ch. 155, App. A, 155.7
Ch. 323    Ch. 155, App. A, 155.7
105.04     120.05
105.05     120.05
109.32     120.03
109.53     120.04,
           120.05
           
 
AGRICULTURAL CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
251.002    150.047
 
CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
State Cite Code Section
State Cite   Code Section
Art. 2.12    33.03
Art. 17.04   30.20
Art. 45.051  30.24
Art. 45.052  30.24
Art. 45.056  30.24
Ch. 62       130.22
Art. 102.015 30.23
             
 
EDUCATION CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
61.003     114.02
           
 
ELECTION CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
259.003    156.39
Ch. 277    10.19
           
 
FAMILY CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
51.08      130.99
           
 
FINANCE CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
302.002    158.014
           
 
GOVERNMENT CODE
State Cite Code Section
State Cite            Code Section
Ch. 30                30.15
Ch. 30, Subchapter A. 30.15
30.00006(b)           30.16
30.00009              30.18
291.001 et seq.       154.009
418.103               31.31
442.014               31.25
442.016               155.86
Ch. 50                Ch. 155, App. A, 155.7
Ch. 551               31.63
Ch. 552               157.03
618.002               96.35
851.001 et seq.       34.03
                      
 
HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE
State Cite Code Section
State Cite      Code Section
Title 10        91.999
11.013          Ch. 94
Ch. 341         51.999
341.091         51.999
361.019         50.99
Ch. 366         51.120,
                51.999
342.007         96.35
366.091         51.999
366.092         51.999
366.0921        51.999
431.001 et seq. Ch. 94
Ch. 437         95.13
481.002         98.096
481.134         130.22,
                130.23
773.051         110.003
821.022         91.014
822.004         91.006
822.005         91.006
822.043         91.070
Ch. 823         91.035
826.001 et seq. Ch. 91
1797.202        110.002
                
 
HUMAN RESOURCES CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
Ch. 42     Ch. 155, App. A, 155.7
Ch. 123    Ch. 155, App. A, 155.7
           
 
LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE
State Cite Code Section
State Cite        Code Section
Ch. 9             156.02
                  10.19,
Ch. 42            90.081,
                  154.004,
                  Ch. 155, App. A, 155.7
43.002            Ch. 155, App. A, 155.5
Ch. 51         154.090
                  150.141,
Ch. 54, Subch. C  150.144,
                  150.145,
                  150.147
54.001            10.99
54.017            51.082 ,
                  150.148
                  33.03,
Ch. 143           93.02,
                  93.07
143.001 et seq.   34.05
143.014           93.07
Ch. 171           31.08
211.003           Ch. 155, App. A, 155.1
211.006           Ch. 155, App. A, 155.5
211.007           Ch. 155, App. A, 155.5
211.007(d)        Ch. 155, App. A, 155.5
211.009(c)        Ch. 155, App. A, 155.6
Ch. 212           154.090,
                  Ch. 155, App. A, 155.7
Ch. 212, Subch. C 154.063
212.015(a)        154.026
212.016(a)        154.029
212.904           154.028
Ch. 213           Ch. 155, App. A, 155.7
Ch. 216           156.02
Ch. 217, Subch. C 51.083
Ch. 241           90.081
241.003           Ch. 155, App. A, 155.4
241.032           90.081,
                  90.088
241.041           90.090
241.044           90.999
Ch. 245           Ch. 155, App. A, 155.5
245.005           154.022
250.001           130.08
Ch. 283           157.04,
                  157.16
283.057           157.14
Ch. 284           157.16
284.002           157.16
284.054           157.16
284.157           157.16
284.302           157.16
315.006           155.86
Ch. 341           33.03
                  158.001-
Ch. 395           158.003,
                  158.007,
                  158.016
395.012           158.003
Ch. 402, Subch. C 52.001,
                  52.002
402.0025          51.027
402.017           50.99
402.044(1)        52.021
402.044(8)        52.004
402.046           52.003
402.047           52.023
402.049           42.023
                  
 
OCCUPATIONS CODE
State Cite Code Section
State Cite     Code Section
1001.002       Ch. 155, App. A, 155.7
Ch. 1201       Ch. 155, App. A, 155.7
1201.003       Ch. 155, App. A, 155.7
Ch. 1202       150.083,
               Ch. 155, App. A, 155.7
1202.002       Ch. 155, App. A, 155.7
1202.003       Ch. 155, App. A, 155.7
1202.253       150.083
Ch. 1903       150.047
1903.002(c)(1) 150.047
Ch. 2308       119.35
               
 
PARKS AND WILDLIFE CODE
State Cite Code Section
State Cite    Code Section
Ch. 31     70.13
31.01 et seq. 96.01
31.055        96.01,
              119.01
31.064        98.083
31.066        98.085
31.067        98.087
31.068        98.088
31.069        98.089
31.070        98.086
31.097        98.096
31.104        98.104
31.105        98.104
31.107        98.092
              
 
PENAL CODE
 
State Cite  Code Section
19.05(2)(a) 98.096
38.10       30.20
42.01       130.08
43.01       130.13
43.02       130.13
            
 
PROPERTY CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
Ch. 91  �150.116
Ch. 921    150.116
           
 
REVISED CIVIL STATUTES
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                   Code Section
Art. 46c                     Ch. 90
Art. 46d                     Ch. 90
Art. 46f - 46i               Ch. 90
Art. 179d, § 19c            35.09
Art. 179d, § 19c(d)         35.09
Art. 179d, § 20             35.09
Art. 1086 - 1096             99.02
Art. 1093                    99.03
Art. 1094                    99.03
Art. 1104                    99.02
Art. 1105                    99.02
Art. 1175(26)                153.01
Art. 1176a                   10.01
Art. 5069-13.01 - 5069-13.07 116.18
Art. 6243-101                150.042
Art. 6243-101, § 15         150.040
Art. 6675a-5e.1              72.15
Art. 6701d                   30.19,
                             70.01
Art. 6701d                   99.10
Art. 6701d, §§ 1 - 20H     70.01
Art. 6701d, § 23            70.69
Art. 6701d, § 24            70.07
Art. 6701d, § 24(f)         70.06
Art. 6701d, § 25            70.08
Art. 6701d, § 27(a)(1)      71.46
Art. 6701d, § 27(a)(2)      70.15,
                             70.67
Art. 6701d, § 27(a)(4)      71.14
Art. 6701d, § 27(a)(6)      71.11
Art. 6701d, § 27(a)(8)      71.28
Art. 6701d, § 31            70.15
Art. 6701d, § 32            70.20
Art. 6701d, § 33            70.22
Art. 6701d, § 34            70.24
Art. 6701d, § 35            70.23
Art. 6701d, § 36            70.25
Art. 6701d, § 37            70.26
Art. 6701d, § 38            70.04
Art. 6701d, § 39            70.04
Art. 6701d, § 40            70.04
Art. 6701d, § 41            70.04
Art. 6701d, § 43            70.05
Art. 6701d, § 49            70.05
Art. 6701d, § 51            71.24
Art. 6701d, § 52            71.01
Art. 6701d, § 53            71.05
Art. 6701d, § 54            71.02
Art. 6701d, § 54(b)         71.03
Art. 6701d, § 54A           71.06
Art. 6701d, § 55            71.04
Art. 6701d, § 56            71.02
Art. 6701d, § 57            71.02
Art. 6701d, § 61(a)         71.19
Art. 6701d, § 65            71.28
Art. 6701d, § 68            71.07
Art. 6701d, § 69            71.07
Art. 6701d, § 70            71.08
Art. 6701d, § 71            71.09
Art. 6701d, § 72            71.09,
                             71.10
Art. 6701d, § 73            71.11
Art. 6701d, § 77            70.51
Art. 6701d, § 79            70.56
Art. 6701d, § 81            70.54,
                             70.55
Art. 6701d, § 91            71.11
Art. 6701d, § 92            71.13
Art. 6701d, § 95            72.02
Art. 6701d, § 96            72.06
Art. 6701d, § 100           71.20
Art. 6701d, § 101           71.21
Art. 6701d, § 104           71.16
Art. 6701d, §§ 108 - 139a  70.02
Art. 6701d, § 124           71.16
Art. 6701d, § 166           71.40
Art. 6701d, § 169           71.40,
                             71.42
Art. 6701d, § 170(a)        71.44
Art. 6701d, § 172           71.45
Art. 6701l-5                 98.096
                             
 
TAX CODE
State Cite Code Section
State Cite       Code Section
26.01            Ch. 155, App. A, 155.6
Ch. 33, Subch. E 96.35
302.001 et seq.  34.05
321.105          35.06
Subch. 351       114.06
351.005          114.06
                 
 
TRANSPORTATION CODE
State Cite Code Section
State Cite         Code Section
22.901             70.13
Ch. 501            70.13
501.001 et seq.    96.01
541.201            71.25
541.302            119.01
543.009            30.20
543.102 to 543.104 30.20
Ch. 545, Subch. G  72.13
Ch. 601            119.17
644.153(q)         70.13
644.153(r)         70.11,
                   119.01
683.013            70.14
683.014            70.14
683.015            70.14
683.016            70.14
683.031            70.13
683.032            70.13
                   
 
UTILITIES CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
54.024     157.16
Ch. 66     157.16
           
 
WATER CODE
 
State Cite    Code Section
11.002(12)(A) 96.02
Ch. 13        157.04
16.315        151.01
Ch. 26        51.072
              
 
REFERENCES TO 1968 CODE
1968 Code Section 1995 Code Section
1968 Code Section           1995 Code Section
1-2(b)                      10.05
1-3                         10.17
1-4                         10.14
1-6                         10.99
2-1                         30.01
2-2                         30.02
2-3                         30.03
2-4                         34.01
2-5                         34.02
2-6                         30.04
2-7                         30.05
2-20                        34.03
2-28                        34.03
2-29                        34.04
2-30                        34.04
2-31                        34.04
2-42                        31.01
2-43                        31.02
2-44                        31.03
2-45                        31.04
2-46                        31.05
2-47                        31.06
2-48                        31.07
2-49                        31.08
2-51                        31.10
2-52                        31.11
2-63                        153.01
2-64                        153.02
2-65                        153.03
2-66                        153.04
2-67                        153.05
2-68                        153.06
2-69                        153.07
2-134                       31.25
2-135                       31.26
2-136                       31.27
2-137                       31.28
2-138                       31.29
2-139                       31.30
2-140                       31.31
3-13                        90.001
3-14                        90.002
3-15                        90.003
3-15.1                      90.004
3-16                        90.005
3-17                        90.006
3-18                        90.007
3-19                        90.008
3-20                        90.009
3-21                        90.010
3-22                        90.011
3-23                        90.012
3-24                        90.013
3-25                        90.014
3-26                        90.015
3-27                        90.016
3-28                        90.017
3-29                        90.018
3-30                        90.019
3-31                        90.020
3-32                        90.021
3-33                        90.022
3-34                        90.023
3-35                        90.024
3-36                        90.999
3-42                        90.105
3-43                        90.106
3-44                        90.107
3-45                        90.108
3-46                        90.109
3-47                        90.110
3-53                        90.035
3-54                        90.036
3-55                        90.037
3-56                        90.038
3-57                        90.039
3-58                        90.040
3-59                        90.041
3-65                        90.050
3-66                        90.051
3-67                        90.052
3-68                        90.053
3-69                        90.054
3-75                        90.065
3-76                        90.066
3-77                        90.067
3-78                        90.068
3-79                        90.069
3-80                        90.070
3-81                        90.071
3-82                        90.072
3-94                        90.080
3-95                        90.081
3-96                        90.082
3-97                        90.083
3-98                        90.084
3-99                        90.085
3-100                       90.086
3-101                       90.087
3-107                       90.088
3-108                       90.089
3-109                       90.090
3-110                       90.999
3-111                       90.091
5-1                         91.001
5-2                         91.025
5-3(a) - (c)                91.026
5-3(d), (e)                 91.036
5-3(f)                      91.027
5-10                        91.002
5-11                        91.003
5-12                        91.004
5-13                        91.005
5-14                        91.006
5-15                        91.007
5-16                        91.066
5-18                        91.040
5-20                        91.037
5-21                        91.038
5-22                        91.039
5-23                        91.008
5-24                        91.009
5-25                        91.010
5-26                        91.011
5-28                        91.069
5-30                        91.013
5-31                        91.013
5-32                        91.013
5-33(a) - (c)               91.014
5-33(d)                     91.015
5-33(e)                     91.016
5-34(a)                     91.068
5-34(b)                     91.067
5-35(a)                     91.070
5-35(b)                     91.999
5-35(c)                     91.071
5-36                        91.041
5-37                        91.999
6-2                         150.001
6-3                         150.015
6-9                         150.002
6-10                        150.003
6-11                        150.004
6-43                        150.091
6-44                        150.092
6-45                        150.093
6-46                        150.094
6-47                        150.095
6-48                        150.096
6-49                        150.097
6-50                        150.100
6-51                        150.101
6-57                        150.098
6-58                        150.099
6-59                        150.103
6-60                        150.104
6-71                        151.02
6-72                        151.03
6-73                        151.04
6-74                        151.05
6-75                        151.06
6-76                        151.07
6-77                        151.08
6-78 (part)                 151.09
6-78 (part)                 151.99
6-79                        151.10
6-80                        151.11
6-81                        151.12
6-82                        151.13
6-83                        151.14
7-1                         32.01
7-2                         32.02
7-3                         32.03
7-4                         32.04
7-5                         32.05
7-6                         32.06
7-7                         32.07
7-8                         32.08
7-9                         32.09
7-10                        32.10
7-11                        32.11
7-12                        32.99
8-2                         34.05
9-1                         30.15
9-2                         30.16
9-3                         30.17
9-4                         30.18
10-1                        30.30
10-3                        30.31
10-4                        30.32
11-1                        150.055
11-1.2                      150.056
11-1.3                      150.056
11-1.4                      150.056
11-2                        150.057
11-3                        150.058
11-3.1                      150.059
11-4                        150.060
11-5                        150.061
11-15                       150.070
11-26                       150.071
11-27                       150.071
11-28                       150.071
11-29                       150.072
11-30                       150.073
11-31                       150.073
11-46                       150.075
11-47                       150.075
11-48                       150.075
11-49                       150.075
11-50                       150.075
11-51                       150.075
11-52                       150.075
11-54                       150.075
11-55                       150.075
11-56                       150.076
11-57                       150.077
11-58                       150.078
11-59                       150.079
11-70                       150.080
11-71                       150.080
11-72                       150.080
11-73                       150.080
11-74                       150.081
11½-1                      100.01
11½-2                      100.02
11½-3                      100.03
11½-4                      100.04
11½-5                      100.05
11½-6                      100.06
11½-7                      100.07
11½-8                      100.08
11½-9                      100.09
11½-10                     100.10
11½-11                     100.11
11½-12                     100.12
12-7(a), (b)                72.75
12½-1                      113.01
12½-2                      113.02
12½-3                      113.03
12½-4                      113.04
12½-5                      113.05
12½-6                      113.06
12½-7                      113.07
12½-8                      113.08
12½-9                      113.09
12½-10                     113.10
12½-11                     113.11
12½-12                     113.12
13-18                       94.99
13-33                       94.01
13-38                       94.99
13½-4                      95.99
14-1                        50.01
14-2                        50.02
14-3                        50.03
14-4                        50.04
14-5                        50.05
14-6                        50.06
14-7                        50.07
14-8                        50.08
14-9                        50.09
14-11                       50.11
14-12                       50.99
16-1                        115.01
16-2                        115.02
16-3                        115.03
16-4                        115.04
16-5                        115.05
16-6                        115.06
17-1                        98.045
17-2                        98.046
17-3                        98.047
17-5                        98.048
17-6                        98.049
17-7                        98.050
17-8                        98.051
17-9                        98.052
17-10(a), (b)               98.053
17-10(c)                    98.999
17-11                       98.054
17-13                       98.056
17-14                       98.057
17-15                       98.058
17-16                       98.059
17-17                       98.060
17-18                       98.061
17-19                       98.062
17-20                       98.063
17-21                       98.064
17-22                       98.065
17-23                       98.066
17-24                       98.067
17-25                       98.068
17-26                       98.069
17-27                       98.070
17-28                       98.071
17-29                       98.072
17-30                       98.073
17-42                       98.080
17-43                       98.081
17-44                       98.082
17-45                       98.083
17-46                       98.084
17-47                       98.085
17-48                       98.086
17-49                       98.087
17-50                       98.088
17-51                       98.089
17-52                       98.090
17-53                       98.091
17-54                       98.092
17-55                       98.093
17-56                       98.094
17-57                       98.095
17-58                       98.096
17-59                       98.097
17-60                       98.098
17-61                       98.099
17-62                       98.100
17-63                       98.101
17-64                       98.102
17-65                       98.103
17-66                       98.104
17-67                       98.105
17-68                       98.106
17-79                       98.115
17-80                       98.116
17-81                       98.117
17-82                       98.118
17-83                       98.119
17-84                       98.120
17-95                       98.125
17-98                       98.128
17-99                       98.128
17-100                      98.128
17-112                      98.127
17-115                      98.129
17-117                      98.132
17½-11                     97.15
17½-12                     97.16
17½-13                     97.17
17½-14                     97.18
17½-15                     97.19
17½-16                     97.20
17½-17                     97.21
17½-18                     97.22
17½-19                     97.01
17½-20                     97.02
17½-22                     97.03
18½-1                      150.030
19-1                        130.01
19-2                        130.02
19-3                        130.03
19-3.1                      130.04
19-4                        130.05
19-6                        130.06
19-7                        99.45
19-8                        130.07
19-9                        130.08
19-11                       130.09
19-12                       130.10
19-13                       130.11
19-14(a) - (c)              130.12
19-14(d)                    130.99
19-17                       130.13
19-18                       130.14
19-19.1(a), (b)             130.15
19-19.1(c)                  130.99
19-19.2                     70.09
19-25(a), (b)               33.01
19-25(c)                    130.17
19-25(d)                    130.99
19-26                       130.16
19½-1                      118.01
19½-2                      118.02
19½-3                      118.03
19½-4                      118.05
19½-5                      118.06
19½-6                      118.07
19½-8                      118.09
19½-9                      118.10
19½-10                     118.12
19½-11                     118.13
19½-12                     118.14
19½-13                     118.15
19½-14                     118.16
19½-15                     118.17
19½-16                     118.18
19½-18 (part)              118.98
19½-18 (part)              118.99
20-1                        98.001
20-2                        98.002
20-3                        98.003
20-4                        98.004
20-12                       98.015
20-13                       98.016
20-14                       98.017
20-15                       98.018
20-16                       98.019
20-24                       98.032
21-1                        116.04,
                            116.05
21-2                        116.04,
                            116.05
21-13                       116.02
21-14                       116.15
21-15                       116.16
21-16                       116.18
21-17                       116.15
21-18                       116.15
21-19                       116.19,
                            116.20
21-22                       116.21,
                            116.22
22-1                        150.040
22-2                        150.041
22-3                        150.042
22-4                        150.043
23-1                        111.01
23-32                       111.30
23-33                       111.31
23-34                       111.32
23-36                       111.33
23-37                       111.34
23-38                       111.35
23-39                       111.36
23-40                       111.37
23-41                       111.38
23-42                       111.39
23-43                       111.40
23-54                       111.50
23-55                       111.51
23-56                       111.52
23-57                       111.53
23-58                       111.54
23-59                       111.55
23-60                       111.56
23-61                       111.57
23-71                       111.65
23-72                       111.66
23-73                       111.67
23-74                       111.68
23-75                       111.69
23-76                       111.70
24-2                        73.01
24-3(a)                     73.02
25-1                        99.01
25-2                        99.02
25-3                        99.03
25-4                        99.04
25-5                        99.05
25-6                        99.06
25-7                        99.07
25-8                        99.08
25-9                        99.09
25-10                       99.10
25-20                       99.20
25-21                       99.21
25-22                       99.22
25-23                       99.23
25-24                       99.24
25-25                       99.25
25-26                       99.26
25-27                       99.27
25-28                       99.28
25-29                       99.29
25-30                       99.30
25-31                       99.31
25-32                       99.32
25-33                       99.33
25-44                       99.40
25-45                       99.41
25-45.1                     99.42
25-46                       99.43
25-47                       99.44
25-48                       99.99
26-1                        35.01
26-2                        35.02
26-3                        35.03
26-4                        35.04
26-5                        35.05
26-6                        35.06
26-7                        35.07
26-8                        35.08
26-11                       114.01
26-12                       114.02
26-13                       114.03
26-14                       114.04
26-15                       114.05
26-16                       114.06
26-17(a)                    114.99
26-17(b), (c)               114.07
26-18                       114.07
27-1                        70.01
27-2                        70.65
27-3                        70.66
27-4                        70.67
27-5                        70.68
27-6                        70.69
27-7                        70.02
27-8                        70.03
27-9                        70.35
27-9.1                      70.36
27-10                       70.37
27-11                       70.38
27-12                       70.04
27-13                       70.05
27-14                       70.06
27-15                       70.07
27-16                       70.08
27-17                       70.70
27-18(a), (b)               70.99
27-18(c)                    72.17
27-27                       71.01
27-28                       71.02
27-29                       71.03
27-30                       71.04
27-31                       71.05
27-32                       71.28
27-33                       71.07
27-34                       71.08
27-35                       71.09
27-36                       71.10
27-37                       71.11
27-38                       71.12
27-39                       71.13
27-40                       71.14
27-41                       71.15
27-42                       71.16
27-43                       71.17
27-44                       71.18
27-45                       71.19
27-46                       71.20
27-47                       71.21
27-48                       71.22
27-49                       71.23
27-50                       71.24
27-51(a) - (c)              71.25
27-52                       71.26
27-53                       71.27
27-61                       70.15
27-62                       70.16
27-63                       70.17
27-64                       70.18
27-65                       70.19
27-66                       70.20
27-67                       70.21
27-68                       70.22
27-69                       70.23
27-70                       70.24
27-71                       70.25
27-72                       70.26
27-83                       71.40
27-84(b) (part)             71.41
27-85                       71.42
27-86                       71.43
27-87                       71.44
27-88                       71.45
27-89                       71.46
27-99                       72.01
27-100                      72.02
27-101                      72.03
27-102                      72.04
27-103                      72.05
27-104                      72.06
27-105                      72.07
27-106                      72.08
27-107                      72.09
27-108                      72.25
27-109                      72.10
27-110                      72.11
27-111                      72.12
27-112                      72.13
27-113                      Ch. 75 Sch. I
27-113(a), (c)              72.14
27-114                      72.15
27-117                      72.26
27-120                      72.27
27-121(a)                   72.28
27-122(a)                   72.29
27-122(b)                   70.99
27-138                      70.99
27-138(c) (part)            Ch. 75 Sch. I
27-148                      70.50
27-149                      70.51
27-150                      70.52
27-151                      70.53
27-152                      70.54
27-153                      70.55
27-154                      70.56
27½-1                      152.01
27½-2                      152.02
27½-3                      152.03
27½-4                      152.04
27½-5                      152.15
27½-6                      152.16
27½-7                      152.17
27½-8                      152.18
27½-9                      152.19
27½-10                     152.20
27½-11                     152.05
27½-12                     152.06
27½-13                     152.21
27½-15                     152.99
28-11                       117.01
28-12                       117.02
28-13                       117.03
28-14                       117.04
28-15                       117.05
28-16                       117.06
28-17                       117.07
28-18                       117.08
28-19                       117.09
28-20                       117.10
28-21                       117.11
28-22                       117.12
28-23                       117.99
28-40                       117.35
28-41                       117.36
28-42                       117.37
29-1                        51.001
29-2                        51.002
29-3                        51.003
29-31                       51.051
29-32                       51.052
29-33                       51.053
29-35                       51.054
29-36                       51.055
29-37                       51.056
29-38                       51.057
29-39                       51.058
29-40                       51.059
29½-1                      119.01
29½-2                      119.02
29½-3                      119.03
29½-4                      119.04
29½-5                      119.05
29½-6                      119.06
29½-7                      119.07
29½-8                      119.08
29½-10                     119.16
29½-11                     119.17
29½-12                     119.30
29½-13                     119.31
29½-14                     119.32
29½-15                     119.33
29½-16                     119.34
29½-17                     119.35
29½-18                     119.36
App. B, § 1.01             154.001
App. B, § 1.02             154.002
App. B, § 1.03             154.003
App. B, § 1.04             154.004
App. B, § 1.05             154.005
App. B, § 1.06             154.006
App. B, § 1.07             154.007
App. B, § 2.01             154.020
App. B, § 2.01.1           154.021
App. B, § 2.02             154.022
App. B, § 2.03             154.023
App. B, § 2.04             154.024
App. B, § 2.05             154.025
App. B, § 2.07             154.027
App. B, Art. III (preamble) 154.040
App. B, § 3.01             154.041
App. B, § 3.02             154.042
App. B, § 3.03             154.043
App. B, § 3.04             154.044
App. B, § 3.05             154.045
App. B, § 3.06             154.046
App. B, § 4.01             154.060
App. B, § 4.02             154.061
App. B, § 4.02(1)          154.999
App. B, § 4.03             154.062
App. B, § 4.06             154.065
App. B, § 4.07             154.066
App. B, § 4.08             154.067
App. B, § 5.01             154.080
App. B, § 5.02             154.081
App. B, § 5.03             154.082
App. B, § 5.04             154.083
App. B, § 5.05             154.084
App. B, § 5.06             154.085
App. B, § 5.07             154.086
App. B, § 5.08             154.087
App. B, § 5.09             154.088
App. B, § 5.10             154.089
App. B, § 7.01             154.120
App. B, § 7.02             154.121
App. B, § 7.03             154.122
App. B, § 7.04             154.123
App. B, § 7.05             154.124
App. B, § 7.06             154.125
App. B, § 7.07             154.126
App. B, § 8.01             154.008
App. B, § 8.02             154.009
App. B, § 8.03             154.010
App. B, § 8.04             154.999
                            
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.    Date Passed Code Section
--          6-14-51     30.01
                        150.058,
--          12-13-51    150.060, 150.61, 150.70 -
                        150.081
                        150.074,
--          2-14-52     150.075,
                        150.080
--          3-9-52      150.015
--          9-8-52      34.03
--          5-11-54     35.01
- -         5-28-54     72.75
--          8-10-54     115.04
--          3-15-55     99.09
                        99.09,
--          4-12-55     99.20 -
                        99.33
--          12-13-55    34.04
--          8-9-56      150.001
--          10-9-56     94.99
--          3-10-59     150.103
                        90.001 -
                        90.003,
                        90.005 -
                        90.024,
                        90.035 -
--          1-12-60     90.041,
                        90.050 -
                        90.054,
                        90.065 -
                        90.072,
                        90.999
--          6-14-60     70.36
--          8-8-61      150.103
--          8-20-62     51.003
                        98.045 -
                        98.052,
                        98.054,
                        98.056 -
                        98.073,
                        98.080 -
--          8-11-64     98.106,
                        98.115 -
                        98.120,
                        98.125 ,
                        98.127 -
                        98.129,
                        98.132  
                        111.50 -
                        111.55,
                        111.57,
--          11-10-64    111.65,
                        111.66,
                        111.68 -
                        111.70
--          11-9-65     30.31,
                        30.32
                        31.01 -
                        31.08,
--          6-23-66     31.10,
                        31.11,
                        98.015 -
                        98.019
--          11-8-66     97.15 -
                        97.22
--          6-16-67     98.053,
                        98.999
--          7-11-67     35.04
--          8-22-67     35.02,
                        35.03
--          12-12-67    70.38
--          2-13-68     51.001,
                        51.002
--          2-11-69     97.15 -
                        97.22
                        152.01 -
                        152.06,
--          4-8-69      152.15 -
                        152.21,
                        152.99
--          5-13-69     35.06
--          6-10-69     10.99
--          9-9-69      98.081
--          1-13-70     70.09
--          4-14-70     130.15,
                        130.99
--          8-11-70     30.16 -
                        30.18
--          12-8-70     95.99
--          4-13-71     51.050 -
                        51.059
--          7-13-71     99.08
--          8-10-71     153.01
--          9-14-71     98.002
                        33.01,
3-1973-12   3-13-72     130.17,
                        130.99
4-1974-1    4-9-74      117.10
                        117.01 -
                        117.09,
4-1974-16   4-9-74      117.11,
                        117.12,
                        117.99
9-1974-40   9-10-74     35.04
12-1974-47  12-10-74    99.10
12-1974-50  12-10-74    70.70
1-1975-4    1-14-75     70.70
2-1975-6    2-11-75     70.07
2-1975-7    2-11-75     71.15
4-1975-9    4-8-75      113.01 -
                        113.12
4-1975-11   4-8-75      117.09,
                        117.10
7-1975-19   7-8-75      35.01
11-1975-37  11-11-75    111.50,
                        111.54
11-1975-42  11-28-75    153.01
                        113.07,
3-1976-11   3-9-76      113.08,
                        113.10
4-1976-17   4-30-76     98.117
4-1976-18   5-11-76     117.09
5-1976-19   5-11-76     150.057,
                        150.080
7-1976-29   7-13-76     98.003
7-1976-30   7-13-76     72.26
10-1976-6   12-19-76    117.09
12-1976-57  12-14-76    51.051,
                        51.052
                        111.50 -
2-1977-4    2-8-77      111.55,
                        111.65,
                        111.66
3-1977-7    3-1-77      130.04
                        111.50 -
4-1977-9    4-12-77     111.56,
                        111.65 -
                        111.67
4-1977-12   4-12-77     35.04
4-1977-13   4-26-77     35.04
6-1977-22   6-14-77     98.001 -
                        98.004
6-1977-24   6-14-77     72.13
9-1977-36   9-13-77     71.25
                        114.01 -
11-1977-44  11-8-77     114.07,
                        114.99
12-1977-53  12-13-77    98.032
12-1977-54  12-13-77    71.41
2-1978-5    2-14-78     94.01
2-1978-6    2-14-78     94.99
                        70.01,
3-1978-12   3-14-78     70.99,
                        72.17
6-1978-28   6-13-78     117.09,
                        117.10
7-1978-30   7-11-78     72.14,
                        Ch. 75, Sch. I
9-1978-39   9-12-78     35.07
9-1978-42   9-12-78     71.26
9-1978-43   9-12-78     34.03
10-1978-49  10-10-78    71.27
11-1978-54  11-14-78    130.16
                        116.02,
                        116.15,
12-1978-58  12-12-78    116.16,
                        116.18 -
                        116.22
2-1979-4    2-13-79     150.075,
                        150.077
2-1979-5    2-13-79     100.01 -
                        100.12
4-1979-19   4-10-79     35.06
                        99.40,
5-1979-25   5-8-79      99.42 -
                        99.44,
                        99.99
5-1979-26   5-8-79      99.41,
                        99.99
6-1979-29   6-12-79     150.004
8-1979-43   8-14-79     150.056
                        111.50,
                        111.51,
10-1979-53  10-9-79     111.56,
                        111.65,
                        111.66
7-1980-23   7-8-80      72.13
10-1980-34  10-14-80    51.051,
                        51.052
1-1981-1    1-13-81     72.15
                        90.080 -
3-1981-5    2-23-81     90.091,
                        90.999
4-1981-10   4-16-81     97.15,
                        97.20
                        31.01,
5-1981-17   5-12-81     31.05,
                        31.06,
                        31.10
12-1981-45  12-8-81     35.01
1-1982-4    1-12-81     34.02
3-1982-10   3-9-82      111.50,
                        111.52
9-1982-43   9-14-82     35.08
12-1982-51  12-14-82    130.12,
                        130.99
5-1983-14   5-10-83     97.01 -
                        97.03
7-1983-22   7-15-83     72.75
                        32.01 -
8-1983-29   6-14-83     32.11,
                        32.99
9-1983-36   9-13-83     114.02,
                        114.03
                        70.01,
                        70.99,
12-1983-47  12-13-83    72.26,
                        72.28,
                        72.29
2-1984-07   2-14-84     30.19
2-1984-09   2-14-84     97.01
                        150.015,
3-1984-10   3-13-84     150.030,
                        150.040 -
                        150.043
7-1984-27   7-10-84     150.080
10-1984-43  10-9-84     51.051,
                        51.052
4-1985-28   4-18-85     111.54
5-1985      5-20-85     70.99,
                        Ch. 75, Sch. I
5-1985-29   5-4-85      51.053
7-1985-46   7-9-85      72.75
2-1986-04   2-11-86     130.04
6-1986-26   6-10-86     30.05
6-1986-27   6-10-86     30.04
9-1986-42   9-23-86     51.052
9-1986-43   9-23-86     97.01
9-1986-45   9-23-86     94.01
12-1986-63  12-9-86     150.075
                        50.01 -
                        50.08,
1-1987-02   1-13-87     50.10,
                        50.11,
                        50.99
                        151.02 -
3-1987-20   3-10-87     151.14,
                        151.99
6-1987-32   6-9-87      150.057
7-1987-38   7-14-87     90.004
                        119.01 -
                        119.08,
8-1987-47   8-11-87     119.16,
                        119.17,
                        119.30 -
                        119.36
9-1987-51   9-8-87      50.03
                        118.01 -
                        118.03,
                        118.05 -
                        118.07,
10-1987-55  10-20-87    118.09,
                        118.10,
                        118.12 -
                        118.18,
                        118.98,
                        118.99
2-1988-09   2-9-88      94.01
6-1988-24   6-14-88     150.041
3-1989-08   3-21-89     150.015
3-1989-09   3-21-89     150.030
                        91.001 -
                        91.011,
                        91.013 -
                        91.016,
                        91.025 -
3-1989-10   3-21-89     91.027,
                        91.036 -
                        91.041,
                        91.066 -
                        91.071,
                        91.999
4-1989-18   4-11-89     151.07
                        154.001 -
                        154.010,
                        154.020,
                        154.022 -
                        154.025,
                        154.027,
                        154.040 -
                        154.046,
8-1989-34   8-8-89      154.060 -
                        154.062,
                        154.065 -
                        154.067,
                        154.080 -
                        154.089,
                        154.120 -
                        154.126,
                        154.999
12-1989-52  11-30-89    154.009
4-1990-6    4-20-90     114.07,
                        114.99
6-1990-11   6-12-90     150.057
6-1990-13   6-12-90     150.075
11-1990-29  11-13-90    150.058
12-1990-30  12-20-90    36.01 -
                        36.13
1-1991-2    1-24-91     94.01
2-1991-8    2-28-91     154.027
3-1991-9    3-12-91     30.05
4-1991-11   4-25-91     31.01
                        10.99,
                        32.99,
                        33.01,
                        50.99,
                        70.09,
                        70.99,
                        72.17,
                        72.29,
                        72.75,
7-1991-21   7-25-91     91.999,
                        94.99,
                        95.99,
                        99.99,
                        117.99,
                        130.15,
                        130.17,
                        130.99,
                        151.09,
                        151.99,
                        152.99
9-1991-30   9-26-91     150.015
                        114.01 -
9-1991-32   10-8-91     114.07,
                        114.99
11-1991-36  11-12-91    151.07,
                        151.08
3-1992-5    3-10-92     154.020,
                        154.021
3-1992-7    3-26-92     31.25 -
                        31.31
5-1992-11   5-28-92     150.059
9-1992-19   9-8-92      50.06,
                        50.11
11-1992-26  11-10-92    71.46
11-1992-27  11-10-92    71.41
11-1992-31  11-24-92    71.41
2-1993-4    2-9-93      31.25
                        50.01,
                        50.06,
5-1993-15   5-11-93     50.07,
                        50.10,
                        50.11
6-1993-20   6-24-93     150.057,
                        150.071
                        99.23,
6-1993-21   6-24-93     99.24,
                        154.088
7-1993-25   7-13-93     98.117,
                        98.118
9-1993-33   9-14-93     50.01,
                        50.06
                        51.015 -
                        51.021,
                        51.023 -
                        51.037,
10-1993-36  10-12-93    51.039,
                        51.040,
                        51.054,
                        51.056,
                        51.999
12-1993-43  - -         112.007
1-1994-02   1-11-94     50.01,
                        50.06
2-1994-12   2-24-94     150.005
                        112.001 -
                        112.028,
                        112.045 -
                        112.053,
                        112.070 -
                        112.080,
4-1994-20   4-12-94     112.095 -
                        112.106,
                        112.120 -
                        112.129,
                        112.145 -
                        112.147,
                        112.999 
6-1994-32   6-23-94     70.99
7-1994-36   7-12-94     70.99
9-1994-43   9-13-94     51.030
9-1994-44   9-13-94     50.06
9-1994-45   9-13-94     51.031,
                        51.033
10-1994-50  10-11-94    130.99
12-1994-59  12-13-94    51.070 -
                        51.086
1-1995-1    12-13-94    90.004
2-1995-4    2-28-95     31.25
                        51.100 -
3-1995-7    3-28-95     51.108,
                        51.999
4-1995-9    4-25-95     150.075
                        51.120 -
8-1995-21   8-22-95     51.130,
                        51.999(D)
9-1995-26   9-12-95     50.06
                        100.02 -
                        100.05,
9-1995-34   9-26-95     100.07,
                        100.10,
                        100.99
11-1995-41  11-14-95    150.042
12-1995-44  12-12-95    51.003
6-1996-24   6-11-96     154.007
6-1996-27   6-25-96     30.06
                        150.015,
7-1996-34   7-23-96     150.016,
                        150.080
                        51.001,
                        51.051,
7-1996-41   7-23-96     51.052,
                        51.053,
                        51.055
9-1996-67   9-24-96     51.030
9-1996-68   9-24-96     51.031
9-1996-69   9-24-96     50.06,
                        50.11
10-1996-72  10-8-96     72.75
11-1996-87  11-26-96    72.75
                        150.057,
                        150.058,
12-1996-89  12-10-96    150.073,
                        150.074,
                        150.075
1-1997-03   1-28-97     51.030
1-1997-04   1-28-97     51.031
8-1997-56   8-12-97     155.15,
                        155.99
9-1997-69   9-9-97      50.06(A)
9-1997-70   9-9-97      51.030
9-1997-71   9-9-97      51.031
9-1997-75   9-23-97     150.030
9-1997-76   9-23-97     150.041
9-1997-77   9-23-97     150.015
10-1997-81  10-14-97    98.003
10-1997-84  10-14-97    150.075
10-1997-88  10-28-97    51.033
10-1997-90  10-28-97    92.01
03-1998-13  3-10-98     91.035
08-1998-46  3-10-98     154.023,
                        154.025
08-1998-39  8-11-98     150.04(B)
09-1998-51  9-8-98      51.031,
                        51.033
09-1998-52  9-8-98      51.030
09-1998-53  9-8-98      50.06,
                        50.11
09-1998-54  9-8-98      150.044
10-1998-67  10-13-98    51.030
10-1998-73  10-27-98    150.035
                        92.01 -
                        92.03,
                        92.05,
11-1998-86  11-24-98    92.06,
                        92.08 -
                        92.29,
                        92.99
3-1999-31   3-9-99      98.002(C)
5-1999-53   5-11-99     150.041(B)
8-1999-74   8-24-99     51.003
9-1999-85   9-14-99     51.031,
                        51.033
9-1999-86   9-14-99     51.030,
                        51.052
9-1999-87   9-14-99     50.06,
                        50.11
10-1999-108 10-12-99    Ch. 101
10-1999-109 10-12-99    Ch. 102
10-1999-110 10-12-99    30.21,
                        30.22
11-1999-115 11-1-99     30.21,
                        30.22
02-2000-18  2-22-00     Ch. 94
04-2000-28  4-11-00     150.057
04-2000-31  4-25-00     101.001,
                        101.064
05-2000-32  5-9-00      150.075
9-2000-40   9-12-00     51.030,
                        51.052
9-2000-41   9-12-00     51.031,
                        51.033
9-2000-42   9-12-00     50.06,
                        50.11
10-2000-51  10-10-00    98.030,
                        98.031
12-2000-60  12-12-00    103.001 -
                        103.015
4-2001-28   4-10-01     155.15
6-2001-40   6-12-01     104.001 -
                        104.013
8-2001-58   8-28-01     35.06
9-2001-63   9-25-01     51.030
9-2001-64   9-25-01     51.031,
                        51.033
9-2001-65   9-25-01     50.06
9-2001-70   9-25-01     90.035
10-2001-75  10-9-01     153.01 -
                        153.10
10-2001-77  10-9-01     91.13
10-2001-78  10-9-01     70.10
12-2001-90  12-11-01    150.015
2-2002-11   2-26-02     130.99
2-2002-12   2-26-02     31.03,
                        102.015
                        150.042,
3-2002-16   3-26-02     150.045,
                        150.046
                        150.058,
3-2002-17   3-26-02     150.059,
                        150.074,
                        150.080
3-2002-18   3-26-02     150.031 -
                        150.033
4-2002-20   4-9-02      98.015
4-2002-23   4-9-02      51.004
6-2002-36   6-11-02     98.005,
                        98.999
6-2002-37   6-11-02     92.03
6-2002-38   6-11-02     150.075
6-2002-42   6-25-02     130.20
6-2002-43   6-25-02     130.21
7-2002-49   7-23-02     130.21
6-2002-50   7-23-02     92.03,
                        101.057
8-2002-53   8-13-02     51.041,
                        51.042
8-2002-55   8-13-02     150.015
8-2002-57   8-13-02     70.99
8-2002-58   8-27-02     118.02,
                        118.05
9-2002-62   9-10-02     90.035
9-2002-63   9-10-02     154.060
9-2002-64   9-10-02     154.007
9-2002-65   9-10-02     150.016
9-2002-66   9-10-02     94.04
9-2002-67   9-10-02     51.030
9-2002-68   9-10-02     51.031,
                        51.033
12-2002-86  12-10-02    150.016
12-2002-87  12-10-02    150.005
01-2003-01  1-14-03     90.035
02-2003-07  2-25-03     91.69
02-2003-09  2-25-03     Repeals 101.015 - 101.026
04-2003-14  4-22-03     110.003
04-2003-16  4-22-03     31.50
08-2003-32  4-26-03     51.070 -
                        51.086
09-2003-40  9-9-03      51.031,
                        51.033
09-2003-41  9-9-03      51.030
                        110.002 -
                        110.003,
                        110.015 -
09-2003-48  9-23-03     110.020,
                        110.030 -
                        110.040,
                        110.999
01-2004-01  1-13-04     35.07,
                        35.08
01-2004-02  1-13-04     52.001 -
                        52.005
                        52.020 -
01-2004-03  1-13-04     52.023,
                        52.999
04-2004-18  4-13-04     98.025,
                        98.026
05-2004-20  5-11-04     150.015
05-2004-21  5-11-04     150.015
05-2004-22  5-11-04     150.030
05-2004-23  5-11-04     150.035
05-2004-24  5-11-04     150.041
05-2004-25  5-11-04     150.057
05-2004-34  5-25-04     52.010
06-2005-35  6-8-04      71.25
06-2004-36  6-8-04      98.026
07-2004-39  7-13-04     150.015
                        93.01 -
                        93.12,
07-2004-41  7-27-04     93.15 -
                        93.17,
                        93.99
                        155.31,
08-2004-47  8-24-04     155.70,
                        155.99
09-2004-53  9-14-04     51.030,
                        51.999
                        51.031,
09-2004-54  9-14-04     51.033,
                        51.999
01-2005-01  1-11-05     30.22
01-2005-08  1-25-05     51.052,
                        51.999
01-2005-12  1-25-05     150.091 -
                        150.105
03-2005-19  3-8-05      72.75,
                        72.99
03-2005-20  3-8-05      98.026,
                        98.027
04-2005-28  4-26-05     70.09
04-2005-29  4-26-05     150.041
08-2005-51  8-23-05     31.08
09-2005-57  9-13-05     51.020,
                        51.030
09-2005-58  9-13-05     51.031,
                        51.033
10-2005-64  10-11-05    92.03
10-2005-71  10-25-05    31.61 -
                        31.64
11-2005-75  11-8-05     150.082 -
                        150.088
02-2006-16  2-28-06     51.070 -
                        51.086
02-2006-17  2-28-06     51.003
04-2006-31  4-25-06     97.01
04-2006-34  4-25-06     51.031,
                        51.033
                        157.01 -
06-2006-46  6-13-06     157.15,
                        157.99
06-2006-47  6-13-06     150.016
                        130.22,
06-2006-51  6-27-06     130.23,
                        130.99
06-2006-52  6-27-06     92.03
08-2006-64  8-6-06      92.15
09-2006-75  9-12-06     51.030
09-2006-76  9-12-06     51.031,
                        51.033
09-2006-77  9-12-06     130.24,
                        130.99
11-2006-89  11-28-06    92.03
11-2006-90  11-28-06    102.065
                        51.032,
01-2007-06  1-23-07     51.034,
                        51.035,
                        51.052
                        118.01 -
01-2007-07  1-23-07     118.20,
                        118.98,
                        118.99
02-2007-11  2-13-07     98.027
02-2007-14  2-13-07     91.17,
                        91.69
04-2007-19  4-10-07     98.026
07-2007-40  7-24-07     110.020
                        155.80 -
                        155.84,
08-2007-44  8-28-07     155.86,
                        155.87,
                        155.99
09-2007-46  9-11-07     51.030
09-2007-47  9-11-07     51.031,
                        51.033
09-2007-48  9-11-07     52.023
                        51.120 -
09-2007-52  9-25-07     51.130,
                        51.999
                        155.80 -
10-2007-57  10-9-07     155.84,
                        155.86,
                        155.87
10-2007-61  11-13-07    157.02,
                        157.03
12-2007-66  12-11-07    90.035,
                        90.999
01-2008-02  1-8-08      31.03
1-2008-03   1-8-08      70.27
03-2008-19  3-25-08     98.026
03-2008-20  3-25-08     98.027
03-2008-21  3-25-08     155.90
03-2008-22  3-25-08     155.91
04-2008-24  4-22-08     71.25
06-2008-35  6-10-08     150.041
09-2008-56  9-9-08      51.030
09-2008-57  9-9-08      51.031,
                        51.033
11-2008-79  11-25-08    150.047
11-2008-80  11-25-08    150.044
                        31.03,
02-2009-07  2-10-09     97.01,
                        97.03,
                        97.15
03-2009-17  3-10-09     98.200 - 98.2002
03-2009-18  3-10-09     98.300 -
                        98.302
04-2009-28  4-28-09     98.400 - 94.402
05-2009-29  5-26-09     99.26
                        51.100,
                        51.101,
                        51.102,
05-2009-30  5-26-09     51.103,
                        51.105,
                        51.106,
                        51.107
05-2009-31  5-26-09     120.01 -
                        120.05
06-2009-35  6-23-09     98.074,
                        98.999
07-2009-44  7-28-09     98.202,
                        98.999
08-2009-50  8-11-09     120.04,
                        120.99
09-2009- 57 9-22-09     70.99,
                        71.29
09-2009-58  9-22-09     130.99
10-2009-60  10-13-09    51.030
10-2009-61  10-13-09    51.031,
                        51.033
10-2009-65  10-13-09    98.202
11-2009-73  11-24-09    101.055
12-2009-74  12-8-09     30.05
03-2010-11  3-9-10      150.041
03-2010-12  3-9-10      98.500 -
                        98.502
04-2010-14  4-13-10     130.99
04-2010-16  4-13-10     130.25
05-2010-25  5-11-10     101.055
07-2010-35  7-13-10     51.030,
                        51.999
07-2010-47  7-27-10     130.26,
                        130.99
08-2010-48  8-10-10     98.030,
                        98.999
09-2010-54  9-14-10     51.030,
                        51.999
                        51.031,
09-2010-55  9-14-10     51.033,
                        51.999
10-2010-59  10-12-10    98.202
10-2010-60  10-12-10    98.600 -
                        98.602
                        114.01,
02-2011-02  2-22-11     114.04,
                        114.99
02-2011-03  2-22-11     30.16
03-2011-08  3-22-11     98.202,
                        98.999
                        94.04,
04-2011-12  4-12-11     94.80,
                        94.98
04-2011-14  4-26-11     51.023,
                        51.999
04-2011-15  4-26-11     51.020,
                        51.999
04-2011-19  4-28-11     98.027,
                        98.999
04-2011-20  4-28-11     98.026,
                        98.999
05-2011-24  5-10-11     101.055,
                        101.999
                        118.01 -
                        118.03,
                        118.05,
                        118.06,
                        118.08,
06-2011-32  6-28-11     118.09,
                        118.11 -
                        118.13,
                        118.16,
                        118.19,
                        118.99
                        118.06,
08-2011-42  8-9-11      118.19,
                        118.99
08-2011-44  8-9-11      93.16
09-2011-51  9-13-11     51.030
09-2011-52  9-13-11     51.031,
                        51.033
09-2011-53  9-27-11     92.03
10-2011-55  10-11-11    98.202
10-2011-57  10-25-11    150.015
10-2011-58  10-25-11    150.057
11-2011-63  11-22-11    97.01
12-2011-67  12-13-11    130.22,
                        130.23
12-2011-68  12-13-11    102.065
                        50.01 -
                        50.03,
12-2011-69  12-13-11    50.05 -
                        50.11,
                        50.99
02-2012-04  2-14-12     99.07
03-2012-12  3-27-12     101.055,
                        101.999
                        101.001 -
                        101.010,
                        101.030 -
                        101.032,
04-2012-13  4-10-12     101.040 -
                        101.043,
                        101.051,
                        101.055,
                        101.061
06-2012-24  6-12-12     101.055,
                        101.999
08-2012-33  8-28-12     51.030
08-2012-34  8-28-12     51.031,
                        51.033
                        151.01 -
11-2012-68  11-29-12    151.15,
                        151.99
03-2013-11  3-12-13     30.15 -
                        30.20
05-2013-25  5-14-13     33.03
                        105.01 -
06-2013-40  7-9-13      105.13,
                        105.99
07-2013-42  7-23-13     101.055
09-2013-52  9-10-13     51.030
09-2013-53  9-10-13     51.031,
                        51.033
                        92.03,
                        92.05,
                        92.09,
09-2013-58  9-24-13     92.15,
                        92.21,
                        92.24,
                        92.25,
                        92.27
10-2013-61  10-8-13     150.015
10-2013-62  10-8-13     150.015
10-2013-63  10-8-13     150.035
                        150.030,
10-2013-64  10-8-13     150.032,
                        150.033
10-2013-65  10-8-13     150.041
10-2013-66  10-8-13     150.015
10-2013-67  10-8-13     93.18
                        92.03 ,
11-2013-80  11-12-13    92.21 ,
                        92.27
12-2013-89  12-10-13    30.23
01-2014-06  1-28-14     93.09
01-2014-07  1-28-14     33.02
01-2014-08  1-28-14     33.03
01-2014-09  1-28-14     34.06
02-2014-13  2-25-14     98.027
02-2014-14  2-25-14     98.502
03-2014-17  3-25-14     51.034
04-2014-31  4-22-14     51.003
05-2014-32  5-13-14     101.042
05-2014-45  5-27-14     35.10 ,
                        51.034
05-2014-48  5-27-14     30.06
08-2014-67  8-12-14     30.06
                        50.06 ,
08-2014-70  8-12-14     50.08  -
                        50.11
08-2014-72  8-26-14     98.202
08-2014-74  9-9-14      50.06
09-2014-75  9-9-14      98.026 ,
                        98.027
09-2014-80  9-23-14     51.030
09-2014-81  9-23-14     51.031 ,
                        51.033
                        105.01 -
10-2014-84  10-14-14    105.13,
                        105.99
10-2014-85  10-14-14    130.20
10-2014-86  10-14-14    98.202
12-2014-99  12-9-14     98.302
12-2014-102 12-18-14    98.502
01-2015-05  1-13-15     33.04,
                        93.04
                        90.022,
                        105.09,
03-2015-20  3-24-15     121.01 -
                        121.04,
                        121.99
03-2015-21  3-24-15     90.035
05-2015-36  5-26-15     120.05
06-2015-44  6-9-15      33.03
06-2015-47  6-23-15     90.035
07-2015-51  7-14-15     120.02
10-2015-70  10-13-15    30.24
10-2015-71  10-13-15    92.04
                        98.030,
10-2015-72  10-27-15    98.032,
                        98.999
10-2015-73  10-27-15    98.502,
                        98.999
01-2016-04  1-26-16     110.020
                        156.01 -
                        156.10,
                        156.20 -
01-2016-07  1-26-16     156.24,
                        156.35 -
                        156.41,
                        156.99,
                        App. A
02-2016-11  2-23-16     30.06
02-2016-12  2-23-16     93.16
04-2016-16  4-12-16     51.034,
                        130.27
08-2016-38  8-9-16      110.020
08-2016-39  8-23-16     98.002
                        91.001 -
                        91.020,
                        91.025 -
                        91.027,
09-2016-47  9-27-16     91.035 -
                        91.041,
                        91.066 -
                        91.071,
                        91.999
10-2016-51  10-25-16    50.11
                        91.001,
01-2017-08  1-24-17     91.010,
                        91.012,
                        91.013
03-2017-22  3-28-17     154.027
03-2017-23  3-28-17     98.302
03-2017-24  3-28-17     98.602
05-2017-27  5-9-17      130.21
05-2017-34  5-23-17     90.035
06-2017-35  6-13-17     150.015
06-2017-36  6-27-17     118.085
07-2017-37  7-11-17     97.01
08-2017-40  8-22-17     157.16
09-2017-43  9-12-17     35.11
09-2017-53  9-26-17     150.015
09-2017-54  9-26-17     150.015
09-2017-55  9-26-17     150.015
09-2017-56  9-26-17     150.015
09-2017-58  9-26-17     150.030
09-2017-59  9-26-17     150.035
09-2017-60  9-26-17     150.041
09-2017-61  9-26-17     150.057
09-2017-62  9-26-17     93.13
                        150.090 -
10-2017-65  10-10-17    150.101,
                        150.103 -
                        150.105
10-2017-67  10-24-17    154.068
                        50.05,
12-2017-75  12-12-17    50.06,
                        50.11
12-2017-76  12-12-17    154.045
12-2017-83  12-12-17    30.06
                        101.001,
                        101.003 -
03-2018-24  3-27-18     101.007,
                        101.043,
                        101.055
03-2018-30  3-27-18     Ch. 75, Sch. I
04-2018-33  4-24-18     90.035
                        158.001 -
                        158.021,
                        158.035,
                        158.050 -
                        158.052,
                        158.065 -
                        158.067,
05-2018-36  5-8-18      158.080 -
                        158.082,
                        158.095,
                        Ch. 158, App. A,
                        B,
                        D,
                        F,
                        H
06-2018-48  6-26-18     120.04
08-2018-59  8-14-18     50.09
08-2018-60  8-28-18     97.01,
                        97.03
08-2018-62  8-28-18     51.052
09-2018-68  9-25-18     97.01
10-2018-80  10-9-18     102.015
                        70.10 -
                        70.14,
                        72.11,
                        72.13,
                        93.99,
                        96.01 -
                        96.11,
                        96.30 -
                        96.37,
                        96.45 -
                        96.58,
                        96.65 -
                        96.67,
                        96.75 -
11-2018-96  11-27-18    96.77,
                        96.79,   
                        96.99,
                        99.05 -
                        99.20,
                        99.99,
                        106.01 -
                        106.11,
                        106.99,
                        130.99,
                        150.115 -
                        150.121,
                        150.140 -
                        150.150,
                        150.999; Repeals 72.40 - 72.50
02-2019-08  2-12-19     101.055
04-2019-19  4-2-19      51.003
06-2019-32  6-11-19     154.028,
                        154.089
                        119.01 -
                        119.04,
                        119.08,
07-2019-39  7-9-19      119.16,
                        119.17,
                        119.30 -
                        119.36,
                        119.99
                        154.005,
                        154.006,
                        154.022,
08-2019-47  8-27-19     154.024,
                        154.026,
                        154.027,
                        154.029
09-2019-55  9-24-19     110.020
                        104.001 -
                        104.004,
                        104.008,
09-2019-56  9-24-19     104.010,
                        104.011,
                        104.014,
                        104.015,
                        104.999
09-2019-57  9-24-19     50.06
09-2019-58  9-24-19     51.030
09-2019-59  9-24-19     51.030,
                        51.031
11-2019-69  11-12-19    97.01
12-2019-72  12-10-19    71.41,
                        71.411; Repeals Ch. 74, Sch. I
12-2019-75  12-10-19    150.141
12-2019-76  12-10-19    98.202
01-2020-07  1-28-20     31.62,
                        31.63
                        155.81 -
                        155.84;
01-2020-08  1-28-20     155.86,
                        155.87;
                        155.90,
                        155.91; Repeals 155.85, 155.88, 155.89
03-2020-20  3-10-20     154.060;
                        154.061
                        51.070 -
                        51.086,
04-2020-24  4-14-20     51.100 -
                        51.108,
                        96.04
09-2020-47  9-8-20      50.06
10-2020-62  10-27-20    154.022
01-2021-02  1-12-21     157.17
06-2021-29  6-22-21     154.063
                        Ch. 158, App. C,
07-2021-31  7-13-21     E,
                        G
                        91.001 -
                        91.023,
                        91.025 -
                        91.027,
07-2021-32  7-13-21     91.035 -
                        91.041,
                        91.065 -
                        91.071,
                        91.999
                        104.001 -
                        104.003,
07-2021-38  7-27-21     104.006,
                        104.010 -
                        104.012
                        154.100,
08-2021-43  8-24-21     154.102,
                        154.105,
                        154.106
08-2021-44  8-24-21     71.26
09-2021-50  9-14-21     30.06
                        116.01 -
                        116.05,
                        116.15 -
09-2021-51  9-14-21     116.17,
                        116.19 -
                        116.22,
                        116.99
09-2021-52  9-28-21     118.19
09-2021-53  9-28-21     50.06
11-2021-64  11-9-21     154.047
11-2021-65  11-9-21     98.125 -
                        98.132
12-2021-67  12-14-21    154.088
01-2022-02  1-11-22     154.084
02-2022-16  2-22-22     98.027
02-2022-21  2-22-22     30.06
03-2022-29  3-22-22     154.020 -
                        154.022
03-2022-30  3-22-22     50.11
                        155.01,
04-2022-34  4-12-22     155.99,
                        Ch. 155, App. A, 155.1 -
                        155.7
04-2022-36  4-26-22     97.01
04-2022-39  4-26-22     94.10
                        154.004,
04-2022-40  4-26-22     154.041,
                        154.080
06-2022-45  6-14-22     31.06
06-2022-46  6-14-22     154.085
                        151.14,
06-2022-47  6-14-22     151.15,
                        151.99
06-2022-50  6-28-22     150.016
07-2022-52  7-12-22     71.411
08-2022-63  8-23-22     50.06
09-2022-67  9-13-22     154.024 -
                        154.026
09-2022-68  9-13-22     90.035
09-2022-69  9-13-22     90.004
                        150.015,
                        150.030,
10-2022-75  10-25-22    150.035,
                        150.041,
                        150.050,
                        150.057
                        93.11 -
10-2022-76  10-25-22    93.14.1,
                        93.18,
                        93.19
11-2022-80  11-8-22     50.11
12-2022-84  12-13-22    30.06
01-2023-01  1-10-23     98.202
01-2023-03  1-24-23     154.007,
                        154.030
01-2023-04  1-24-23     154.080
                        Ch. 155, App. A,
02-2023-09  2-28-23     155.2 -
                        155.5,
                        155.7
03-2023-16  3-28-23     51.030,
                        51.031
                        10.99,
                        70.37,
                        70.99,
                        72.13,
                        72.16,
                        72.17,
                        72.99,
                        95.01 -
                        95.15,
                        95.99,
                        96.01,
                        96.02,
                        96.04,
                        96.06,
                        96.33,
04-2023-30  4-25-23     96.45,
                        96.46,
                        96.49 -
                        96.51,
                        96.67,
                        96.68,
                        96.75,
                        96.78,
                        96.79,
                        99.06,
                        130.04,
                        130.60 -
                        130.64,
                        150.141,
                        150.142,
                        150.146,
                        150.150
                        90.080 -
06-2023-39  6-13-23     90.092,
                        Ch. 155, App. A, 155.4.06
06-2023-41  6-13-23     71.25
07-2023-47  7-11-23     151.07
08-2023-53  8-22-23     Repeals 130.18
08-2023-54  8-22-23     50.06
08-2023-59  8-22-23     154.060
08-2023-60  8-22-23     154.089
09-2023-61  9-12-23     Ch. 155, App. A, 155.4.05, 155.4.06
10-2023-74  10-24-23    Ch. 155, App. A, 155.5.05
                        92.02,
11-2023-76  11-14-23    92.03,
                        92.28,
                        92.30
                        119.01,
01-2024-05  1-23-24     119.31,
                        119.35
03-2024-14  3-12-24     10.19
04-2024-22  4-9-24      51.003
04-2024-25  4-23-24     154.090
04-2024-27  4-23-24     98.002
06-2024-42  6-11-24     92.03
07-2024-48  7-9-24      154.100
                        Ch. 158, Apps.
                        A,
10-2024-66  10-22-24    B,
                        D,
                        F,
                        H
01-2025-01  1-14-25     Ch. 155, App. A, 155.3.08,
                        155.4.02
01-2025-05  1-28-25     130.11
03-2025-11  3-25-25     154.045,
                        Ch. 155, App. A, 155.5.07
                        Ch. 155, App. A, 155.3.03,
04-2025-15  4-22-25     155.3.04,
                        155.7.01
05-2025-19  5-27-25     158.022
                        156.01 -
                        156.07,
                        156.20 -
                        156.25,
                        156.35 -
                        156.42,
06-2025-20  6-10-25     156.55 -
                        156.60,
                        156.70,
                        156.71,
                        156.80 -
                        156.82,
                        156.99
08-2025-25  8-12-25     50.06,
                        50.11
                        Ch. 155, App. A,
07-2025-23  7-22-25     155.3.03,
                        155.3.04
10-2025-35  10-14-25    93.09
                       
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No.    Date Passed Code Section
3-1974-12   2-19-74     35.07
3-1976-11B  3-9-76      34.01
11-1978-54A 11-14-78    130.17
04-2021-54  4-27-21     30.06
01-2024-21  1-23-24     30.06
                       
 
